

===== PAGE 1 =====

Optimal Formula Instruments
Kirill Borusyak
UC Berkeley
Peter Hull
Brown∗
May 2026
Abstract
When estimating the effects of treatments defined by complex formulas,
researchers often use simple functions of exogenous shocks as instruments.
A leading example is “simulated instruments” for public policy eligibility,
which capture variation in state-level policy generosity. We show how
more powerful instruments can be constructed by incorporating heteroge-
neous shock exposure while using a recentering procedure to avoid bias.
We characterize the asymptotically eﬀicient instruments in this class and
propose an algorithm for constructing feasible approximations to them.
Compared to a simulated instrument approach, our approach yields a
44% smaller standard error on the private insurance crowd-out effect of
Medicaid enrollment from the 2014 Affordable Care Act expansions.
∗Contact: k.borusyak@berkeley.edu and peter_hull@brown.edu. Portions of this paper are based on material in
a previously circulated working paper, Non-Random Exposure to Exogenous Shocks: Theory and Applications . We
thank Dmitry Arkhangelsky, Tim Armstrong, Stephane Bonhomme, Kevin Chen, Tetsuya Kaji, Michal Kolesár, Lihua
Lei, and Stefan Wager for helpful conversations. OpenAI’s ChatGPT contributed valuable insights. Refine.ink was
used to check the paper for consistency and clarity. We thank Molly Frean, Jonathan Gruber, and Ben Sommers for
sharing code and data; we thank David Roodman for help with the Stata boottest package. Elise Parrish provided
outstanding research assistance.

===== PAGE 2 =====

1 Introduction
Many economic variables are given by complex formulas, incorporating multiple sources of variation.
Examples include an individual’s eligibility for a public program like Medicaid or their level of un-
employment insurance benefits, both of which are functions of state-level policy decisions as well as
various individual characteristics (e.g. family structure, household income, or work history). When
estimating the causal effects of such treatments, researchers often construct instrumental variables
(IVs) as simple functions of only one source of variation. For example, the influential “simulated
instrument” approach of Currie and Gruber ( 1996a, 1996b) leverages state-level policy shocks by
constructing an index of Medicaid generosity which is then used to instrument an individual’s Med-
icaid eligibility.1 These instruments are valid when the policy shocks are exogenous and the chosen
function of them predicts eligibility.
This paper shows how more powerful instruments can be constructed and used in such settings.
Intuitively, power gains can come from the instrument predicting the treatment better. This can be
achieved by constructing the instrument as a treatment prediction that is a function (or “formula”)
of not only the exogenous shocks but also other observables capturing observations’ differential shock
exposure. Such treatment predictions need not be valid instruments, because of the non-random
observables used in their construction. However, following Borusyak and Hull ( 2023), this problem
can be addressed by “recentering” the treatment prediction: i.e., subtracting its expectation over
the exogenous shocks, holding fixed the other observables. The class of valid formula instruments
is therefore much broader than functions of exogenous shocks only.
We first characterize optimal formula instruments in a general setting. We show that the asymp-
totically eﬀicient IV involves three steps: obtaining the best predictor of the treatment from both
the shocks and other predetermined measures of shock exposure, recentering it to avoid bias, and
adjusting for the error term’s dependence on shock exposure and for heteroskedasticity. This result
does not require iid data, covering a wide range of empirical settings where both observed and
unobserved shocks—potentially varying at different “levels”—affect many observations jointly.
We then propose an algorithm to approximate optimal IVs in practice, focusing on the first two
steps: obtaining the best treatment predictor and recentering it. While implementing both steps
nonparametrically may be feasible in some settings, in general they represent a high-dimensional
problem that may be impractical or infeasible—especially in non- iid data. Instead, we propose using
knowledge the researcher has on the treatment formula as well as the “design” (i.e., data-generating
process) of the exogenous shocks. First, the researcher predicts the treatment from the shocks
and other observables which enter the treatment formula, setting any unobserved or endogenous
components of the formula to a base value (such as zero). When there are no unobserved or
endogenous components, this prediction is the treatment itself. Second, the researcher recenters
this prediction by drawing counterfactual sets of exogenous shocks. Optionally residualizing the
1See also Cullen and Gruber ( 2000) and East and Kuka ( 2015) for simulated instruments in the unemployment
insurance setting. Other simulated instrument applications include Cohodes et al. ( 2016), Frean et al. ( 2017), Brown
et al. ( 2018), and Hackmann ( 2019).
2

===== PAGE 3 =====

recentered prediction on covariates yields an approximation to the optimal instrument, up to the
heteroskedasticity adjustment that is not popular in practice.
Specializing this algorithm to the program eligibility setting yields a likely improvement over
the conventional simulated instruments approach. If program eligibility is fully determined by
predetermined observables and the policy shock, our proposed approach involves instrumenting
an individual’s eligibility with the difference between her actual eligibility (as the best possible
predictor) and her expected eligibility, where the expectation is taken for each individual across
the exogenous policy shocks that could have been realized (such as realized policies of comparable
states). If program eligibility depends on other variables, such as income that can respond endoge-
nously to policy shocks, the researcher can imperfectly predict eligibility using lagged income and
recenter that prediction instead.
The proposed algorithm can also be helpful in popular settings where researchers construct
formula instruments as certain treatment predictions, often without formal justification. Consider,
for instance, Boustan et al. ( 2013) who construct an instrument for the change in the Gini index of
regional income distribution. They use exogenous national shocks to incomes of different population
groups along with initial local shares of those groups. From these data, they measure and use as an
IV the Herfindahl change that would follow if the exogenous income shocks were the only changes
that took place, in a nonlinear version of a Bartik ( 1991) instrument. While this instrument is
generally not valid without recentering, our results show that the recentered version of their IV
is approximately optimal. Our results similarly justify the shift-share instrument construction
proposed informally by Borusyak et al. ( 2025a), from a decomposition of the endogenous treatment.
We then demonstrate the power gains empirically, in an application to the partial 2014 Medicaid
expansion from the Affordable Care Act (ACA). A recentered IV which incorporates variation in
individuals’ exposure to state expansion decisions yields a 44% smaller standard error on the private
insurance crowdout effect of Medicaid enrollment, compared to a more conventional simulated IV
approach leveraging expansion shocks only. These power gains are robust to different IV specifica-
tions and assumptions on the expansion shock design. Monte Carlo simulations show the minimum
detectable effects of recentered IV are roughly three times smaller than those of simulated IV.
Our theoretical results build on the classical literature on eﬀiciency bounds and optimal instru-
ments in linear and partially linear models. For linear models without functional nuisance param-
eters, Chamberlain ( 1987) characterizes the semi-parametric eﬀiciency bound (SEB) and gives an
IV estimator that achieves the bound. More closely connected to our setting is the partially linear
model of, e.g., Robinson ( 1988): it is the special case when the outcomes, treatments, shocks, and
other observed characteristics are iid, with the role of the nuisance function played by the expecta-
tion of the error term given the characteristics. There Chamberlain ( 1992) characterizes the SEB,
Newey ( 1989) proposes an estimator that achieves this bound in the special case when the treat-
ment is exogenous, and Ai and Chen ( 2003) derive an eﬀicient sieve-based estimator in the general
case. Against this backdrop, our theoretical contribution is to characterize optimal instruments in
a broad class of non- iid settings including shift-share IV and many other popular designs (Borusyak
3

===== PAGE 4 =====

et al. 2025b). We develop a proof technique for such settings: we characterize the estimator that
minimizes an approximation to the estimator variance in finite samples and verify that the approx-
imation is accurate in large samples under suitable regularity conditions. 2 We further establish
conditions under which split-sample estimation of the optimal instrument preserves its asymptotic
properties and show that our optimal IV attains the Chamberlain ( 1992) SEB in the iid case.
Most directly, we build on Borusyak and Hull ( 2023) who show how valid IVs can be derived,
through recentering, from any formulas combining exogenous shocks and non-random measures of
shock exposure. Here we show which formulas are theoretically best to recenter and use as IVs, and
propose a general algorithm for approximating them in practice. 3
In contemporaneous work, Coussens and Spiess ( 2021) characterize optimal instruments given by
interactions of a single observation-specific shock with predetermined characteristics, highlighting
the benefit of interacting the shock with the complier status of the individual. Our result nests
theirs, with individual’s exposure to the shocks generalizing the complier status beyond binary
instruments and allowing multiple shocks to affect the same observation’s treatment and the same
shocks to affect multiple observations’ treatments. While Coussens and Spiess ( 2021) focus on
learning the compliance status nonparametrically in iid data, we leverage a priori information on
the structure of the treatment to approximate the optimal IV.
We organize the rest of the paper as follows. The next section builds intuition with a simple
example in the simulated instrument setting. Section 3 develops the theoretical results while Section
4 demonstrates them in an application. Section 5 concludes. Additional theoretical results are given
in Appendix A; Appendix B provides details for the application. Proofs are given in Appendix C.
2 Motivating Example
Consider estimating the causal effect of eligibility for a public program like Medicaid on an outcome
like program takeup or later health. Formally, we consider a simple causal model of
yi = βxi + εi,
relating outcome yi for individual i to her Medicaid eligibility xi. Here εi denotes the potential
outcome that individual i would see when ineligible for Medicaid (i.e., when xi = 0 ) and β is the
causal parameter of interest. We wish to estimate β while allowing for the possibility of endogenous
eligibility: i.e., that xi and εi are correlated. To focus on estimation eﬀiciency, we assume here that
the causal effect β is homogeneous.
2The analysis of eﬀiciency with non- iid data dates back at least to generalized least squares estimation (Aitken
1935); optimal instruments under conditional moment restrictions in non- iid data have been most thoroughly studied
with time-series data (e.g., Hansen ( 1985); see Anatolyev ( 2007) for a review). Our proof technique bypasses the
need for additional structure in such analyses, such as an assumption of Gaussianity in the examples in Section 6.4
of Newey ( 1990).
3Our application to Medicaid eligibility effects similarly builds on an example that Borusyak and Hull ( 2023) use to
motivate instrument recentering as a means to avoid omitted variables bias; here, we use it to motivate and illustrate
eﬀiciency gains with our optimal IV approximation.
4

===== PAGE 5 =====

Medicaid eligibility can be represented as a formula which incorporates state-level government
policy and individual characteristics that determine an individual’s exposure to different polices.
To formalize this, let ci be a vector of characteristics for individual i (e.g., family structure and
income), let s(i) ∈ {1, . . . ,50} index i’s state of residence, and let gk be the Medicaid policy in state
k formalized as the set of family types and income combinations that make one eligible for Medicaid
in that state. Eligibility is then given by:
xi = 1

ci ∈ gs(i)

.
Consider estimation of β in an idealized scenario where Medicaid policies are drawn in a natural
experiment: i.e., randomly from some pool of potential policies. Formally we suppose the gk are
drawn from some distribution, independently of all ci, s(i), and εi. We do not assume the other de-
terminants of eligibility are exogenous (i.e., unrelated to εi): individuals with certain characteristics
or living in particular states may have systematically higher or lower potential outcomes. Hence,
despite the exogeneity of state policies, ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation of β is likely biased.
We need an instrument for eligibility, which is uncorrelated with εi but correlated with xi.
Simulated instruments leverage the exogenous policy shocks by constructing an IV as a function
of state policy only: zi = f
 
gs(i)

. The function f (·) is chosen to make the instrument powerful—
specifically, to make zi a strong predictor of the eligibility treatment. The strongest predictor that
only varies through state policy is E

xi | gs(i)

, which can be interpreted as the average generosity
of i’s state policy. Currie and Gruber ( 1996a, 1996b) propose a simple approximation to this pre-
dictor. They build a large and nationally-representative group of individuals j = 1, . . . , J, simulate
individuals’ eligibility under each state policy ¯g, and define f (¯g) as the fraction of individuals who
would be eligible under that policy:
f (¯g) = 1
J
JX
j=1
1 [cj ∈ ¯g] .
The simulated instrument zi = f
 
gs(i)

is a fixed function of the exogenous policy in an individual’s
state and is therefore uncorrelated with εi.4 It is nevertheless correlated with xi because we expect
the eligibility of any given individual to be higher in states where the policy is more generous.
A drawback of such instruments, which limits their power, is that they discard all within-state
variation in eligibility due to ci. This may seem unavoidable, as such variation is non-random
and using it may introduce bias. For example, one might consider constructing an instrument to
approximate E

xi | gs(i), ci

instead of E

xi | gs(i)

; the former has a stronger first-stage correlation
with xi, so using this IV would likely produce a smaller standard error than zi. However, this
instrument may be correlated with εi through some characteristics in ci, making the IV estimates
biased. Indeed, here E

xi | gs(i), ci

= xi, since eligibility is fully determined by gs(i) and ci. Using
4Formally, for any fixed f (·), E [zi | s(i), εi] = E
[
f
(
gs(i)
)
| s(i), εi
]
=
∫
f (¯g)dG(¯g) = E [zi] ≡ µz where G(·) is the
distribution of potential Medicaid policies. Thus Cov [zi, εi] = E [(zi − µz) εi] = E [(E [zi | s(i), εi] − µz) εi] = 0 .
5

===== PAGE 6 =====

it as an instrument is thus equivalent to OLS estimation, with the same bias concerns as before.
The main practical insight of this paper is that improved predictions of formula treatments,
including xi itself, can be used to construct valid and more powerful instruments. Consider:
˜zi = 1[ci ∈ gs(i)]
| {z }
=xi
− 1
50
50X
k=1
1[ci ∈ gk]
| {z }
≡µi
.
The first term of ˜zi is individual i’s eligibility, determined by both her characteristics ci and the
realized policy draw in her state gs(i). The second term is her expected eligibility over policy
draws. This µi is derived from a thought experiment in which the realized policies are randomly
reshuffled across the 50 states, since each permutation of (g1, . . . , g50) is as likely to have been
realized when policies are drawn randomly from some set. On average, an individual’s eligibility
across such permutations equals the share of states in which her characteristics would make her
eligible. Borusyak and Hull ( 2023) show that the recentering of xi by µi makes ˜zi a valid instrument.
Intuitively, IV regressions that use ˜zi compare individuals who have more Medicaid eligibility than
expected given the policy experiment (i.e., those with ˜zi > 0) to those with less-than-expected
eligibility (with ˜zi < 0). Since this delineation is by chance, driven only by the random policy
shocks, such IV regressions are free from bias. In the next section we discuss different strategies for
recentering that follow from different assumptions of how the shocks are drawn.
The recentered instrument ˜zi is likely more powerful than the simulated instrument zi, as it is
more predictive of the treatment. By construction, the policy generosity measure f
 
gs(i)

is not
tailored to an individual’s exposure to the policies, limiting zi’s correlation with xi. In contrast,
˜zi is perfectly correlated with xi conditional on ci (i.e., among individuals with the same family
structure and income but who reside in different states). Only individuals for whom the policy
variation is relevant are in the effective sample with ˜zi, since ˜zi = 0 for any individual who is, e.g.,
so rich that they are not eligible under any policy or so poor that they are eligible under all policies.
The next section formalizes the sense in which such instruments likely yield precise estimates of β,
and proposes a general algorithm for producing them from formula treatments like xi.5
Power when using ˜zi may be further increased by including functions of ci (e.g. family size or
some income bins) as controls. Such controls soak up residual variation in εi while not affecting the
instrument’s first stage (because ˜zi is uncorrelated with all predetermined characteristics as well
as with εi), typically increasing estimation eﬀiciency. 6 The next section formalizes this logic by
showing how the theoretically most eﬀicient IV estimation of β involves such residual adjustment
in addition to forming the recentered best predictor ˜zi; we add an optional step to the algorithm
that involves such adjustment. Although extra covariates can increase the power of simulated IV
5Precision gains may also yield additional benefits: the more powerful recentered instrument may be less prone to
finite-sample weak-IV bias and sizable asymptotic bias from small violations of instrument exogeneity (Wooldridge
2002, Ch. 5.2.6), and may also yield more powerful placebo tests (as we show in the application).
6If the included controls linearly span expected eligibility µi, using ˜zi as the instrument is numerically equivalent
to using OLS estimation on xi with the same controls—slightly simplifying implementation (Borusyak and Hull 2023).
6

===== PAGE 7 =====

estimation too, the two approaches do not coincide even when controlling for ci flexibly.7
Before proceeding, we note that while xi in this example is fully determined by the exogenous
policy shocks gk and predetermined variables ci and s(i), similar recentered IVs may be constructed
for treatments with endogenous components. For example, suppose an individual’s income ui is
relevant to Medicaid eligibility, ci = ( ui, ˜ci), but is not predetermined: income may respond to
the policy shocks as individuals change employment. In this case ˜zi will not be a valid IV, as
recentering by µi will not account for the endogenous response of ci to gs(i). Still, a strong predictor
of xi can be formed from its formula: one can compute the predicted eligibility based on the realized
policy shocks, other characteristics ˜ci, and an earlier measure of income u0i that replaces ui. This
approximation of E

xi | gs(i), u0i, ˜ci

can then be recentered, as before, to obtain a valid and likely
powerful instrument. The same logic applies when an individual’s state of residence s(i) is not
predetermined, such as when individuals move in response to the policy shocks. Cases where some
characteristics relevant for eligibility are unobserved can also be handled similarly. 8
3 Theory
We now develop general theory for optimal formula instruments. Section 3.1 introduces the set-
ting and the class of valid recentered instruments. Section 3.2 derives the recentered instrument
that is asymptotically most eﬀicient, while Section 3.3 develops an algorithm for obtaining feasible
approximations to the optimal IV.
3.1 Setting
An outcome yi and treatment xi = hi(g, w, u) are observed for a set of units i = 1 , . . . , N. Here
h1(·), . . . , hN (·) is a set of known functions, g = ( g1, . . . , gK) is a set of observed shocks (poten-
tially varying at a different level than i), w is a set of observed predetermined variables, and u is
another set of variables (potentially unobserved and also potentially varying at different levels). 9
This formulation of xi is so far without loss of generality; Assumption 1, below, makes it restric-
tive by introducing substantive distinctions between g, w, and u (in particular g will be assumed
exogenous, as in the motivating example). Since multiple observations may be exposed to the same
observed and potentially unobserved shocks, we do not make any assumptions of independently
or identically distributed ( iid) data and instead work with a fixed sample of size N ; that is, we
7The two approaches would coincide if policy generosity was measured for each combination of characteristics in
ci separately, which amounts to interacting flexible functions of ci with eligibility in addition to controlling for them.
This strategy, however, is only feasible if ci is discrete with a suﬀiciently small number of distinct values, which is not
the case in most applications of simulated IV (see., e.g., Gruber ( 2003, p.47)).
8For example, we might be interested in the effects of Medicaid enrollment rather than eligibility and not observe an
individual’s compliance status (i.e. whether they would take up Medicaid when eligible). This ui can be ignored when
predicting xi from the shocks and predetermined observables, e.g. by presuming that all individuals are compliers. If
compliance status can be partially predicted, incorporating this may yield further precision gains.
9In some settings, like the motivating Medicaid example, it may be more natural to write xi = h(g, wi, ui) for an
“anonymous” formula h(·) and observation-specific inputs wi and ui. Not all settings with formula treatments are
naturally written this way, however; see, e.g., footnote 12 of Borusyak et al. ( 2025b).
7

===== PAGE 8 =====

consider (x1, . . . , xN , y1, . . . , yN , g, w, u) as drawn from some joint distribution. 10 The results apply
to observations randomly sampled from some population as well.
A causal effect or structural parameter β relates the outcome to treatment by
yi = βxi + εi, (1)
where εi is an unobserved error. Here we assume the outcome model is linear with a constant
effect.11 For notational simplicity, we do not include a constant in the model (as when, e.g.,
E [P
i εi] = 0 ); Appendix A.1 generalizes our results to settings where yi and xi are demeaned or
otherwise residualized on a vector of predetermined covariates. 12
To estimate β, we look for an instrument z = (z1, . . . , zN )′ that satisfies an exogeneity condition:
E
"
1
N
X
i
ziεi
#
= 0 (2)
as well as a relevance condition E
 1
N
P
i zixi

̸= 0 , such that β = E [P
i ziyi] /E [P
i zixi]. The IV
estimator corresponding to z is then given by ˆβ [z] = (P
i ziyi) / (P
i zixi).
While the class of IV estimators is restrictive relative to the more general class considered in,
for instance, Chamberlain ( 1992), our non- iid analysis makes it much less restrictive than it may
seem. In particular, by the Frisch-Waugh-Lovell theorem, it includes IV estimators with covariates
since zi can be chosen to be an in-sample residualization of some instrument on those covariates.
Indeed, as we show below, the optimal instrument involves such adjustment.
We form instruments by assuming the shocks are exogenous and relevant to the treatment.
Specifically, we suppose that, conditional on the observed variables w, the outcome errors are
mean-independent of g and the treatment is affected by g:
Assumption 1. (Shock exogeneity): E [εi | g, w] = E [εi | w] a.s. for all i.
Assumption 2. (Relevance): E [xi | g, w] ̸= E [xi | w] with positive probability for some i.
In the basic Medicaid example, g is the vector of state eligibility policies and w contains the relevant
characteristics ci of all individuals along with their states of residence, s(i). Then hi(·) is the known
algorithm which checks the eligibility of individual i using these inputs, and u is empty. If income
changes in response to the policy, we include it in u while adding pre-period income to w.
10We allow this distribution to be partly degenerate, such as when potential outcomes and predetermined observables
are treated as fixed as in a more conventional design-based analysis (e.g., Athey and Imbens ( 2022)). See footnote 14
in Borusyak and Hull ( 2023) for more discussion.
11The constant effects assumption follows the optimal IV literature, facilitating an analysis of relative eﬀiciency
across different IV estimators—since different instrument constructions will generally identify different weighted aver-
ages of heterogeneous effects. Online Appendix D.1 characterizes these averages, showing they involve convex weights
under natural generalizations of the classic independence, exclusion, and monotonicity assumptions in Imbens and
Angrist (1994). We note that a weaker independence condition suﬀices under constant effects, which we impose below.
12See also Online Appendix D.2, which discusses an extension of our framework with yi and xi residualized on a
set of fixed effects in panel data.
8

===== PAGE 9 =====

Two remarks about Assumption 1 are due here. First, in some applications, the shocks are
randomized after the realization of w. This makes them fully independent from w as well as from
the errors under an exclusion restriction (that shocks only affect outcomes through the treatment),
satisfying Assumption 1. Second, Assumption 1 allows εi to be arbitrarily correlated with the
variables in w such that OLS estimation is generally biased even if u is empty.13
The class of instruments satisfying exogeneity under Assumption 1 can be sharply characterized.
We refer to instruments constructed as zi = fi(g, w) for a set of non-stochastic functions {fi(·)}N
i=1
as formula instruments . We further call them recentered formula instruments, or just recentered
instruments, if they are mean-zero given w:
E [fi(g, w) | w] = 0 a.s. for all i. (3)
Let R denote the class of recentered instruments. The class of estimators induced by them is wider
than it may appear: in particular, it includes estimators that use any formula instrument pi(g, w)
while controlling for a vector mi(w) that linearly spans the “expected instrument” E [pi(g, w) | w].14
For example, the simulated IV estimator from Section 2 that has a constant expected instrument
(see footnote 4) is induced by a z ∈ R as long as the intercept is controlled for.
We then have the following result, letting ε be the vector collecting the εi:
Proposition 1. Under Assumption 1, all recentered instruments satisfy the exogeneity condition
(2). Conversely, only recentered instruments satisfy ( 2) absent further assumptions on ε: for any
distribution of (z, g, w) there exists a conditional distribution of ε | (z, g, w) such that Assumption 1
holds but ( 2) fails, unless z is a deterministic function of (g, w) satisfying ( 3).
The first part of the proposition follows Borusyak and Hull ( 2023) to show that recentered instru-
ments are valid (here, under a weaker mean-independence condition). The second part is new, and
highlights two ideas. First, formula instruments that are not recentered include some variation from
w and are thus prone to exogeneity failures without further restrictions on the error term. Second,
naturally, Assumption 1 alone would not justify the validity of instruments constructed from any
other data besides the shocks and predetermined variables in w. With this characterization, we
next look for the most eﬀicient recentered instrument.
13As in Borusyak and Hull ( 2023, footnote 14), we allow (ε, w) to be stochastic or (as is often assumed in design-
based analyses of finite populations) fixed. With fixed (ε, w), Assumption 1 holds trivially but its role is shifted to
the assumption, below, that the distribution of g | w is known.
14To see this, first note that R clearly includes instruments of the form zi = pi(g, w)−E [pi(g, w) | w] with no controls.
Moreover, estimators that use any such z ∈ R as an IV while controlling for some set of functions m(w) = ( mi(w))N
i=1
are also recentered IV estimators. This follows because, by the Frisch–Waugh–Lovell theorem, they can be represented
as IV estimators that use the in-sample projection of z on m(w) as the instrument. It is easy to see that R is closed
with respect to such residualizations. Furthermore, estimators that instrument with pi(g, w) while controlling for a
m(w) that linearly spans E [pi(g, w) | w] are also equivalent to those using z ∈ R since they are identical to using
pi(g, w) − E [pi(g, w) | w] as an IV while controlling for m(w). Note that residualization has an additional impact on
the error term, which the extended results in Appendix A.1 allow for.
9

===== PAGE 10 =====

3.2 Optimal IV
We take a non-standard approach to deriving the asymptotically eﬀicient instrument, given the
non-iid setup. In this setting, there may be multiple asymptotic regimes under which recentered
IV estimators are consistent, possibly with different convergence rates. 15 We therefore develop an
approach that does not rely on a specific asymptotic approximation, in two steps. We first introduce
a finite-population approximation to the variance of any recentered IV estimator, which we show
is accurate in large samples in any asymptotic sequence in which the estimator is asymptotically
normal and satisfies regularity conditions. We then find the recentered instrument that minimizes
this approximation in finite samples.
The approximate variance of the IV estimator using recentered instrument z ∈ R is defined as:
V [z] = Var [z′ε]
E [z′x]2 ,
for x = ( x1, . . . , xN )′, assuming the relevant variance and expectation exist. This expression rep-
resents the variance of 1
N z′ε/E
 1
N z′x

; if the first-stage covariance 1
N z′x converges to a non-zero
constant Π as N → ∞, we expect V [z]−1 to be a good measure of estimation precision when N is
large and appropriate regularity conditions hold.
To formalize this asymptotic approximation, we say that a recentered IV estimator is asymp-
totically normal if, for non-random rN → ∞ , rN

ˆβ [z] − β
 D→ N (0, V ) for some 0 < V < ∞ as
N → ∞. We say that ˆβ [z] converges to β at rate rN and refer to V as the asymptotic variance of
ˆβ [z]. We further consider two high-level conditions on z:
Condition 1. 1
N z′x
p
→ Π for some Π ̸= 0;
Condition 2. 1
N z′x and
 
rN 1
N z′ε
2 are uniformly integrable.
While Condition 1 is standard and Condition 2 is a weak regularity condition, the asymptotic
normality of recentered IV estimators deserves further discussion. Adão et al. ( 2019) give suﬀicient
conditions for instruments that are linear in the shocks (i.e., shift-share instruments, discussed
more below). In Appendix A.4 we give an alternative path to asymptotic normality with general
recentered instruments that depend only on a small set of mutually independent shocks, with non-
overlapping sets of shocks for most observation pairs. Both results require the number of shocks to
be large. However, a growing number of shocks is not generally necessary: as shown by Goldsmith-
Pinkham et al. ( 2020) in the shift-share case, asymptotically normal estimators may also exist
with as few as one shock when the errors are suﬀiciently weakly correlated and shock exposure is
exogenous.16
15For instance, recentered shift-share IV estimators can be consistent with fixed K under additional restrictions on
the error term (Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. 2020) as well as in the K → ∞ regime without these restrictions (Adão
et al. 2019; Borusyak et al. 2022). The convergence rate is
√
N in the former regime but typically
√
K in the latter
regime, which may be slower than
√
N .
16 Section I.B of Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. ( 2020) details the single-shock case. See also Propositions 3–5 of
Borusyak and Hull ( 2023), which show a growing number of shocks is essentially necessary for consistency of recentered
10

===== PAGE 11 =====

We then have the following result:
Proposition 2. For any recentered IV estimator ˆβ [z] that is asymptotically normal with convergence
rate rN and asymptotic variance V and satisfies Conditions 1 and 2, V [z] provides a good large-
sample approximation to the variance:
lim
N →∞
V [z]
V /r2
N
= 1.
This result justifies looking for the recentered IV estimator with the smallest approximate variance
V [z]. The following theorem characterizes the solution:
Theorem 1. Suppose Assumption 1 holds, E [εε′ | g, w] = E [εε′ | w] a.s., and this matrix is a.s.
invertible. Consider the recentered instrument
z∗ = E

εε′ | w
−1 ˜z for ˜z = E [x | g, w] − E [x | w] . (4)
The associated ˆβ [z∗] has the smallest approximate variance of all recentered IV estimators:
z∗ ∈ arg min
z∈R
V [z] ,
with
V [z∗] = E
h
(E [x | g, w] − E [x | w])′ E

εε′ | w
−1 (E [x | g, w] − E [x | w])
i−1
.
Three comments are due here. First, note that we impose weak conditions on the data-generating
process: only that the shocks are exogenous in the sense of Assumption 1 and that the errors are not
perfectly collinear. 17 While Theorem 1 also requires the second moments of ε to be independent of
g given w (which holds when g ⊥ ⊥(ε, w), as when shocks are fully randomized), Appendix Theorem
A1 provides a more cluttered expression for the optimal IV without that assumption. Second, we
note that the approximate variance is minimized among all recentered IV estimators, regardless
of whether they are asymptotically normal, although V [z] need not be a useful object otherwise.
Third, note that by Assumption 2 the instruments ˜z and z∗ are non-trivial.
Theorem 1 builds on classic results on eﬀicient estimation in iid data. In particular, Chamberlain
(1987) characterizes optimal instruments in the iid linear model (see also Newey and McFadden
(1994) for a different characterization that our proof leverages). Newey ( 1989, Section 5) derives
an optimal estimator for the partially linear model with conditionally exogenous treatment, in
which the functional nuisance parameter corresponds to E [ε | w] in our notation. 18 Ai and Chen
IV estimators absent restrictions on the correlation structure of the errors. We note that the results below would hold
even if the asymptotic distribution is not Gaussian, although this case is non-standard.
17The invertibility requirement precludes the existence of a function c(w) satisfying c(w)′ε = 0 (almost-surely or at
least conditional on a set of w of non-zero measure), which rules out two distinct cases. The first case is when the data
have been residualized on the covariates c(w), so that c(w)′x = 0 whenever c(w)′ε = 0 ; Appendix A.1 generalizes all
results to that case. The second case is if c(w)′x ̸= 0 ; then β can be revealed exactly for some realizations of w—an
unrealistic scenario.
18Conditional treatment exogeneity means E [ε − E [ε | w] | x] = 0 , which here holds when u = ∅.
11

===== PAGE 12 =====

(2003) propose a sieve-based eﬀicient estimator in the general iid case. While the key advantage
of Theorem 1 is that it applies in non- iid data, it is also instructive to specialize it to the iid case
in which the semi-parametric eﬀiciency bound (SEB) of Chamberlain ( 1992) applies. Appendix
Proposition A4 shows that z∗ attains this SEB asymptotically, suggesting that our limiting of the
estimator class to recentered IV does not carry an asymptotic eﬀiciency cost. 19
Equation (4) reveals the structure of the optimal instrument z∗. It is based on the best predictor
of treatment given the exogenous shocks and predetermined variables, E [x | g, w], recentered by its
expectation over the shocks E [x | w] = E [E [x | g, w] | w]. This recentered best predictor ˜z is then
adjusted by E [εε′ | w]−1. The following proposition unpacks this last step:
Proposition 3. Let ψ = E [ε | w] and Ω = Var [ε | w] be the conditional mean and variance of the
errors, with Ω a.s. invertible. Then z∗ from Theorem 1 can be written as
z∗ = Ω −1 (˜z − νρψ ) , (5)
where ρψ = ψ′Ω−1 ˜z
ψ′Ω−1ψ ψ is the Ω−1-weighted projection of ˜z on ψ, and ν = ψ′Ω−1ψ
1+ψ′Ω−1ψ ∈ [0, 1).
This result shows that z∗ is obtained by two sequential adjustments to the recentered best predictor
˜z. First, ˜z is partially residualized on ψ. In many cases, ν → 1 when N → ∞ ; by the Frisch-
Waugh-Lovell theorem, the limit case of ν = 1 amounts to controlling for ψ while instrumenting
with ˜z.20 Second, there is an adjustment for the inverse conditional variance of the errors Ω−1, as
in conventional generalized least squares estimation.
Appendix Proposition A3 specializes Theorem 1 to the class of shift-share instruments that are
linear in the shocks, for which feasible versions may be easier to obtain (as discussed below). The
optimal instrument in this class resembles z∗, except with ˜z replaced by an optimal linear prediction
of the treatment—i.e., the fitted value from a linear regression of xi on the (recentered) vector of
shocks, with coeﬀicients that can vary across i and depend on w. This linear regression parallels
the non-parametric regression of xi on the shocks that yields E [xi | g, w] in Theorem 1.
3.3 Feasible Approximations
Drawing on the above results, we propose an approach (Algorithm 1) for obtaining feasible ap-
proximations to z∗ in three steps: approximating the best predictor E [x | g, w], recentering it, and
(optionally) adjusting for E [εε′ | w]−1. The algorithm leverages the researcher’s knowledge of the
formula of the treatment and the “design” (i.e. data-generating process) of the exogenous shocks.
Consequently, it can be used even in situations when the conditional means and variances underlying
19Despite this, the estimators in Newey ( 1989) and Ai and Chen ( 2003) do not coincide with the one in Theorem 1 in
iid data: both are weighted versions of the Robinson ( 1988) estimator, which involves non-parametric residualization
of y and x on w, while ˆβ [z∗] involves partially controlling for E [ε | w] (see Proposition 3 and footnote 20 below).
20In general the residualization is partial for the same reason why, in conventional panel data settings, the eﬀicient
random effects estimator partially demeans the data by unit (e.g. Wooldridge ( 2002, p.286)). As with the unit-specific
residual means in the random effects case, ψ is orthogonal to ˜z in expectation but not in the observed realization. Full
residualization which imposes in-sample orthogonality is thus generally ineﬀicient, as with the fixed effect estimator.
12

===== PAGE 13 =====

z∗ cannot be consistently estimated because the data are high-dimensional or non- iid. We compare
the Algorithm 1 estimator with an alternative plug-in estimator using nonparametric estimates of
the terms in z∗ at the end of this subsection.
The first step is to approximate the best predictor E [xi | g, w] with some pi(g, w) using the treat-
ment formula xi = hi(g, w, u). This is trivial when u is empty, as in the initial Section 2 example,
since then E [xi | g, w] = xi ≡ pi(g, w). Otherwise, we propose forming a predictor by integrating
hi(g, w, u) over some hypothetical distribution of u | g, w. In the simplest case, if there is a typical
or default value ¯u of u, it can be plugged in to form a prediction of pi(g, w) = hi(g, w, ¯u). This
is the approach suggested at the end of Section 2, where lagged income u0i substitutes for the po-
tentially endogenous contemporaneous income ui.21 Importantly, per Proposition 1, a misspecified
distribution for u | g, w may lead to an imperfect approximation of E [xi | g, w]. This inaccuracy will
generally reduce eﬀiciency, but it will not introduce bias so long as the approximation is recentered.
The second step is to recenter the predictor pi(g, w) using knowledge of the shock assignment pro-
cess: formally, the distribution of g | w. Here we summarize several approaches, following Borusyak
and Hull ( 2023) and Borusyak et al. ( 2025b). Recentering is straightforward when the shock as-
signment process is known, such as when g is generated by a randomized control trial with some
experimental protocol (conditional on w, or more typically independent from w). The researcher
can draw a large number of counterfactual shock vectors g(j) from this protocol, recompute the pre-
dictor pi(g(j), w) for each j = 1 , . . . , J, and average them: 1
J
PJ
j=1 pi(g(j), w). This approximation
to E [pi(g, w) | w] can then be subtracted from pi(g, w), or controlled for in estimation. 22 The same
steps can be followed in observational data when the elements of g are assumed to be exchangeable
conditional on w, as with the exchangeable policy shocks in Section 2. The counterfactual g(j) can
then be generated as a permutation of g, bypassing the challenge of specifying the distribution of the
shocks.23 More generally, g(j) could be drawn from conditional permutations of shocks within—but
not across—groups with the same shock distribution; we illustrate this approach below.
Recentering requires weaker yet assumptions when pi(·) is linear in the shocks—as in shift-share
instrument constructions. In that case, only the expectation of the shocks matters for E [pi(g, w) | w]
and thus needs to be modeled. In cases where that approach to recentering is more tenable, Borusyak
et al. ( 2025b, Section 3.3) propose approximating a nonlinear pi(g, w) with its linear approximation
in g around some fixed g = ¯g. This approach yields coeﬀicients approximating those in the infeasible
regressions of Appendix Proposition A3, discussed above. As with other imperfect predictions of
E [xi | g, w], the cost of such simpler recentering is a likely power loss from the linear approximation.
21Berry et al. ( 1999) take a similar approach in the context of estimating demand for differentiated products, setting
unobserved product quality shifters to zero when constructing a (non-recentered) instrument. Conlon and Gortmaker
(2020) propose a refinement to this approach, integrating over the empirical distribution of estimated quality shifters
rather than using a single default value.
22While a large J reduces noise in the instrument p(g, w) − 1
J
∑J
j=1 p(g(j), w), approximating µi with any finite
number of draws J ≥ 1 is suﬀicient for identification. To see this, redefine the shocks as ˜g =
(
g, g(1), . . . , g(J)
)
. The
original Assumption 1 implies Assumption 1 with respect to ˜g. Moreover, p(g, w) − 1
J
∑J
j=1 p(g(j), w) is in R redefined
with respect to ˜g because E
[
p(g, w) − 1
J
∑J
j=1 p(g(j), w) | w
]
= 0 when g | w and g(j) | w have the same distribution.
23Formally, this requires including the permutation class of g in w.
13

===== PAGE 14 =====

Algorithm 1 Feasible Approximation to the Optimal IV
0. Represent the treatment as a formula xi = hi(g, w, u) for known functions hi(·), where the
inputs are exogenous shocks g, predetermined variables w, and possibly other variables u that
are either unobserved or may respond to the shocks.
1. Construct a treatment prediction pi(g, w). If the treatment is a function of g and w only, set
pi(g, w) = xi. Otherwise, set pi(g, w) = hi(g, w, ¯u) by replacing u with some base value ¯u.
• Optional: Replace pi(g, w) with its linear approximation in g around some base value ¯g.
2. Form the instrument by recentering the prediction: ˜zi = pi(g, w) − µi for µi = E [pi(g, w) | w].
• To obtain µi, draw some (preferably large) number J of counterfactual shock vectors
g(j) from the data-generating process of g (e.g., permutations of g when the shocks are
exchangeable). Set µi = 1
J
PJ
j=1 pi(g(j), w).
• If pi(g, w) is linear in the shocks, µi can be computed analytically from a specification
for E [g | w] without a full specification of the shock data-generating process.
3. Optional: Residualize ˜z on predetermined variables (i.e., functions of w) that may predict the
error ε, and reweight it by an estimate of Var [ε | w]−1.
An optional third step in Algorithm 1 adjusts the ˜z approximation by an estimate of E [εε′ | w]−1.
Per Proposition 3, this involves two adjustments: residualizing on (i.e., controlling for) functions
of w that predict ε, and weighting by an estimate of Var [ε | w]−1 (akin to feasible generalized
least squares). In non- iid or high-dimensional settings, both steps may be challenging. Moreover,
weighting by a flexible but noisy estimate of Var [ε | w]−1 may introduce bias, as in conventional
settings (e.g., Angrist and Pischke 2008, p. 93).
A practical option is therefore to disregard the third step of Algorithm 1 and just instrument
with the recentered pi(g, w) as an approximation to ˜z. This approach has two formal justifications.
First, it is straightforward to show that the unadjusted ˜z has the highest correlation with the
treatment among all recentered IVs:
Lemma 1. ˜z ∈ arg maxz∈R
E[z′x]2
E[z′z]E[x′x] .
This result immediately implies that ˜z produces the highest first-stage R2, and so approximations
to it should have favorable power. Second, because of this property, ˜z minimizes the worst-case
estimator variance absent sharp information on the conditional error distribution:
Lemma 2. Let ¯λ ≥ 0 be some constant and let E be the class of random vectors e = ( e1, . . . , eN )′
such that the maximum eigenvalue of E [ee′ | g, w] is bounded by ¯λ uniformly over (g, w). Suppose
the only knowledge a researcher has about ε is ε ∈ E . Then ˜z is approximately minimax, in that:
˜z ∈ arg min
z∈R
max
e∈E
Var [z′e]
E [z′x]2 .
14

===== PAGE 15 =====

This result captures the intuition that maximizing the first-stage R2 is optimal when one has weak
priors on the distribution of ε, and worries about making further incorrect adjustments.
Rather than skipping Step 3, the researcher could control for an arbitrary low-dimensional func-
tion of w that may be expected to predict E [ε | w]. This may improve eﬀiciency, though this is
not guaranteed (see Appendix C.9 of Borusyak and Hull ( 2021) for a counterexample). Alterna-
tively, when nonparametric estimation of the nuisance functions in z∗ is possible, one could use
a plug-in instrument ˆz∗ =bE [εε′ | w]−1

bE [x | g, w] − E
h
bE [x | g, w] | w
i
instead of the Algorithm
1 approximation. Online Appendix D.3 formalizes this strategy by deriving regularity conditions
under which ˆβ [ˆz∗] has the same asymptotic distribution as ˆβ [z∗] and thereby attains the minimal
asymptotic variance. This result requires that bE [x | g, w] is recentered by E
h
bE [x | g, w] | w
i
rather
than by a generic nonparametric estimate of E [x | w], showing the importance of Step 2 whether or
not nonparametric estimation is additionally pursued. 24 Moreover, the result requires that the non-
parametric estimates bE [x | g, w] and bE [εε′ | w] are consistent and obtained via cross-fitting, which
is challenging if not impossible without iid data.25 Algorithm 1 does not involve non-parametric
estimation or cross-fitting, which highlights its practical value especially in complex settings.
4 Application
We illustrate our approach by estimating the private insurance crowdout effects of Medicaid eligi-
bility, using the partial Affordable Care Act (ACA) expansion in 2014. Section 4.1 describes the
setting and adapts our theoretical results to this setting while Section 4.2 presents the results.
4.1 Setting and Estimators
In January 2014, many US states expanded Medicaid eligibility under the ACA to cover non-
elderly adults with incomes up to 138% of the federal poverty level (FPL). This expansion did
not cover all states since a 2012 Supreme Court decision (NFIB v. Sebelius, 567 U.S. 519) let
individual state governors opt out of the more generous ACA coverage level. In practice, expansion
decisions partially followed partisan lines: among the 43 states with less generous Medicaid policies
in 2013, only 8 out of 30 states with Republican governors expanded while 11 out of 13 states with
Democratic governors did. 26 Non-expansion states mostly kept their 2013 eligibility rules in place,
24This makes our plug-in estimator different from other nonparametric estimators, such as those studied by Ai and
Chen ( 2003) and Chernozhukov et al. ( 2018) in the iid setting, which estimate E [x | w] fully nonparametrically but
require nontrivial smoothness conditions on the nuisance functions or rate conditions on their estimates. Our results
avoid such conditions, similarly to the results on double machine learning with a known propensity score (Wager 2025,
Corollary 3.3).
25For example, Borusyak et al. ( 2025b, Section 6.1) show how nonparametric estimation of E [x | g, w] can be
impossible in a shift-share setting. If all observations are exposed to the same vector of aggregate shocks, of which
only one realization is observed, it is not possible to consistently estimate E [x | g, w] except by leveraging information
on the formula and shock design, as in Step 1 of Algorithm 1. Similarly, when all observations are exposed to the same
shocks, standard cross-fitting methods are not applicable. Even in the context of our Section 4 application, where
individuals in the sample are drawn randomly but the shocks are assigned to a relatively small number of clusters
(states), nonparametric estimation of E [x | g, w] would be challenging.
26See Frean et al. ( 2017) for more background on the partial Medicaid expansions and related ACA policy changes.
15

===== PAGE 16 =====

though some increased coverage slightly. Expansion states mostly adopted the ACA’s 138% FPL
threshold, though some extended coverage further.
We use state expansion decisions as policy shocks for estimating Medicaid eligibility effects.
To formalize this approach, consider a repeated cross section of individuals i observed in years
t(i) ∈ {2013, 2014} with states of residence s(i). We write i’s Medicaid eligibility, xi ∈ {0, 1}, as:
xi = ht(i)(ci, e2013
s(i) , gs(i), e∆
s(i)) (6)
where ci collects relevant individual characteristics (income, work status, and parental status), e2013
k
is state k’s Medicaid eligibility policy in 2013, gk ∈ {0, 1} indicates whether or not state k expanded
coverage under the ACA in 2014, and e∆
k includes other 2014 changes to Medicaid coverage (i.e.
non-ACA coverage increases or ACA expansions beyond the 138% FPL threshold). These inputs are
suﬀicient to determine individual i’s eligibility, as formalized by the h2013(·) and h2014(·) functions.27
We assume the expansion shocks are exogenous, conditional on the political party of states’
governors, when estimating eligibility effects in a difference-in-differences setup. Formally, let qk be
an indicator for state k having a Republican governor in 2013. We relate individual outcomes to
eligibility in the repeated cross section by:
yi = βxi + αs(i) + τqs(i),t(i) + εi, (7)
where αk and τq,t are state and party-by-year fixed effects. Following Assumption 1, we formalize
shock exogeneity as E [εi | g, w] = E [εi | w] where g collects the 43 expansion dummies and w collects
all ci, s(i), t(i), e2013
k , and qk.28 This assumption is broadly consistent with earlier difference-in-
differences analyses that compare outcome trends of expansion and non-expansion states before and
after 2014, either without adjustment for state-level confounders (e.g. Miller and Wherry ( 2017)) or
with adjustment for state party or other observables (e.g. A verett et al. ( 2019)). It is nevertheless
a strong assumption, requiring states with potentially very different socioeconomic characteristics
affecting εi to not be systematically more or less likely to expand coverage conditional on the
governor’s party. We thus relax it in robustness checks below, allowing expansion decisions to
depend on other observables like household income. Note that we impose no assumptions on other
coverage changes e∆
k , which we collect in u.
Our baseline design assumption is that the shocks are drawn from the same (unknown) distri-
bution among states with the same-party governor. This view of the 2014 expansion decisions, as
arising from a natural experiment, conforms with some earlier analyses (e.g. Black et al. 2019) and
27Here, as in the initial Section 2 motivating example, we assume income (and other characteristics) does not
respond to expansion decisions. In our repeated cross-section, we do not observe pre-period income so we cannot
apply the extension at the end of that section. We allow, however, income (and other characteristics) to be arbitrarily
correlated with potential outcomes.
28State fixed effects can be justified here by a state-level unobservable which drives the expansion decision, has a
time-invariant effect on the outcome, and is independent of w. Idiosyncratic policy preferences of the state’s governor
is one example; see Online Appendix D.2 for details. Party-by-year fixed effects are included to span the expectation
of the simulated instrument, as discussed below.
16

===== PAGE 17 =====

allows us to construct counterfactual g(j) vectors by permuting the shocks conditional on state party.
That is, all g(j) with expansions in some 8 Republican-governor states and some 11 Democratic-
governor states are valid shock counterfactuals. We again check sensitivity to richer designs below,
allowing expansion probabilities to vary by additional state observables.
Following Section 2, we consider two IV specifications using these assumptions. First, we con-
struct a simulated instrument zi = f t(i) 
gs(i)

which only leverages the shock variation. Since the
policy only changes in 2014, we set zi to zero for all individuals in 2013 as well as those in non-
expansion states. For the expansion states in 2014, the instrument measures the change in the policy
generosity. Specifically, it equals the difference in the fraction of the 2014 nationally representa-
tive sample who would be eligible for Medicaid between two situations: had all states adopted the
ACA’s 138% FLP threshold vs. had all of them kept their 2013 policies intact. Exogeneity of the
expansion shocks and the design assumption make this zi uncorrelated with εi controlling for state
and party-by-year fixed effects—controls that span the expected instrument. Note that estimation
with this zi is equivalent to instrumenting by the interaction of gs(i) and a 2014 indicator, as in an
instrumented difference-in-differences specification. 29
Next, we construct an approximation to the recentered best predictor ˜zi by applying the first
two steps of Algorithm 1 to the formula for Medicaid eligibility. In the first step, we predict
eligibility from the exogenous policy shocks g and predetermined variables w, ignoring the non-
ACA eligibility changes in u. In our notation, this involves replacing e∆
k with ∅ in equation ( 6)
which yields a predicted eligibility of pi(g, w) = ht(i)(ci, e2013
s(i) , gs(i), ∅). Second, we recenter this
prediction by subtracting its expectation µi with respect to the expansion shocks, conditional on
individual characteristics, 2013 policies, and the party of every state governor. Consistent with our
design assumption, we account for differences in expansion probabilities by state party when taking
the expectation:
µi ≡ E [pi(g, w) | w] = π(qs(i)) · ht(i)

ci, e2013
s(i) , 1, ∅

+ (1 − π(qs(i))) · ht(i)

ci, e2013
s(i) , 0, ∅

,
where π(0) = 11/13 and π(1) = 8/30 correspond to the fractions of expansion states among those
with Democratic and Republican governors, respectively.
The recentered instrument pi(g, w) − µi equals zero for all individuals in 2013, as well as indi-
viduals in 2014 whose characteristics make them eligible (or ineligible) with or without an ACA
expansion in their state. It only varies among individuals in 2014 whose eligibility is affected by
expansion decisions. We thus restrict estimation to these “exposed” individuals in 2014 and, in
keeping with the difference-in-differences structure, the corresponding group of individuals in 2013
(i.e., those whose characteristics and state of residence would make them exposed to the expansion
shocks in 2014)—what we call the exposed sample. We control for state fixed effects, year fixed
effects, and the interaction of the state party indicator qs(i) and year, as in the simulated IV spec-
ification. With these controls and the restriction to the exposed sample, recentered IV estimation
29Indeed, given state and year fixed effects, the specific values of the instrument in the four cells (2013 vs. 2014
and treated vs. untreated states) are immaterial as long as zi increases more in 2014 in the treated states.
17

===== PAGE 18 =====

is again equivalent to instrumenting by the interaction of gs(i) and a 2014 indicator. 30
We apply both IV strategies using data from the 2013 and 2014 American Community Surveys,
using representative 1% samples of non-disabled U.S. adults (ages 21-64) residing in the 43 states
eligible for ACA expansion in 2014. Appendix B.1 details the sample construction.
Our primary outcomes are indicators for Medicaid enrollment and for private insurance coverage.
Effects on the former outcome capture takeup of the expanded Medicaid coverage; effects on the
latter outcome capture how Medicaid eligibility crowds out other forms of insurance—an important
policy parameter in the literature (e.g. Frean et al. 2017; Leung and Mas 2018). We also look at
effects on an indicator for employer-sponsored insurance coverage, which is the most common type
of private insurance and is the focus of the classic literature on Medicaid crowdout (e.g. Cutler and
Gruber ( 1996)). In our setting, Medicaid may also crowdout private insurance obtained directly
on ACA state health exchanges (as documented by Frean et al. ( 2017)). This would have different
economic implications, as such crowdout would not typically have employment effects.
4.2 Results
Our recentered IV is much more predictive of actual Medicaid eligibility than the simulated IV.
First-stage estimates in Table 1 show that the simulated IV predicts eligibility with a coeﬀicient of
0.85 and a standard error of 0.11 (column 1) while the recentered IV in the exposed sample has a
higher coeﬀicient of 0.97 and a smaller standard error of 0.02 (column 2); the latter coeﬀicient is
statistically indistinguishable from one, as should be the case with the recentered best predictor. 31
The partial R2 for the recentered IV is also dramatically higher (0.80, vs. 0.01 for the simulated IV).
Column 3 of the table shows that just adding the recentered IV to the simulated IV specification
increases the partial R2 meaningfully (to 0.10) and renders the simulated IV coeﬀicient small and
statistically insignificant. All of these results are consistent with the recentered IV giving a better
approximation to the recentered best predictor ˜zi.
This improved first-stage prediction translates to meaningful precision gains for the effects of
eligibility on Medicaid and private insurance coverage. Columns 1 and 2 of Table 2, Panel A,
show the standard error is 64% smaller with recentered IV vs. simulated IV (0.010 vs. 0.028)
when estimating the effects of Medicaid eligibility on Medicaid enrollment. For crowdout effects,
which take private insurance coverage as the outcome, standard errors are reduced by 70% (0.007
vs. 0.023; columns 3 and 4) from an insignificant simulated IV estimate to a significant recentered
IV estimate. These estimates incorporate effects from both the conventional crowdout margin of
employer-sponsored insurance as well as crowdout from ACA state health exchanges; in columns 5
and 6 we isolate crowd-out of employer-sponsored plans. Here neither simulated nor recentered IV
yields significant estimates, though the latter is again much more precise.
30This is because the recentered instrument can be written in the exposed sample as gs(i) × 1 [t(i) = 2014] − π(0) ×
1 [t(i) = 2014] − (π(1) − π(0)) × qs(i) × 1 [t(i) = 2014] with the latter two terms absorbed by the controls.
31Throughout we report state-clustered standard errors. To address finite-sample concerns with a relatively small
number of states, we report confidence intervals by a wild score bootstrap as suggested by Kline and Santos ( 2012)
and use them for hypothesis testing. This computationally eﬀicient approach requires inverting bootstrapped test
statistics, which generally makes confidence intervals asymmetric around the IV point estimate.
18

===== PAGE 19 =====

Table 1: Medicaid Application: First-Stage Effects on Eligibility
(1) (2) (3)
Simulated IV 0.851 0.032
(0.113) (0.140)
[0.585,1.108] [-0.252,0.479]
Recentered IV 0.972 0.817
(0.015) (0.171)
[0.941,1.014] [0.394,1.161]
Partial R2 0.012 0.799 0.103
Exposed Sample N Y N
States 43 43 43
Individuals 2,397,313 421,042 2,397,313
Notes: This table reports first-stage coeﬀicients for the two instruments described in the text: a
conventional simulated instrument and a recentered prediction of Medicaid eligibility. Columns 1
and 3 estimate regressions in the full sample of individuals in 2013–14, while Column 2 restricts
to the sample of individuals in both years whose characteristics and state of residence make them
exposed to the partial ACA Medicaid expansion in 2014. All regressions control for state and year
fixed effects and an indicator for Republican-governed states interacted with year. State-clustered
standard errors are reported in parentheses; 95% confidence intervals, obtained by a wild score
bootstrap, are reported in brackets. R2 statistics partial out the controls.
In economic terms, the recentered IV estimates suggest a total private insurance crowdout rate
of 32.1%, with a 7.2 percentage point increase in Medicaid coverage offset by a 2.3 percentage point
decrease in private insurance coverage. This relative effect, reported in Panel B column 4 as the
coeﬀicient from an IV regression of private insurance coverage on Medicaid enrollment (instead of
eligibility), is similar to the 42% crowd-out that Leung and Mas ( 2018) find in applying a difference-
in-differences specification to the 2014 Medicaid expansion. 32 However, we find minimal evidence
for crowdout from employer-sponsored insurance plans even with our more powerful recentered
IV. Instead, our estimates suggest crowdout arises from direct-purchase private insurance via state
health exchanges (implying minimal employment effects). This aligns with the findings of Frean et
al. (2017), who exploit multiple sources of ACA-induced policy variation with a simulated instrument
(see also Courtemanche et al. ( 2017), Kaestner et al. ( 2017), and Maclean and Saloner ( 2019)). For
both private insurance and employer-sponsored insurance, the standard errors of the recentered IV
crowdout parameter estimates in Panel B are around 44% smaller than those of simulated IV.
Importantly, the recentered IV power gains are not a product of the relatively simple simulated
32The corresponding simulated IV specification yields a private insurance crowd-out rate of 36.1%, reported in
Panel B column 3, which is not statistically distinguishable from the recentered IV estimate ( p = 0.726). Recentered
and simulated IV also yield statistically indistinguishable estimates for the employer-sponsored insurance outcome
(p = 0 .116), reported in Panel B columns 5-6. In contrast, the recentered and simulated IV estimates which use
Medicaid eligibility as the endogenous variable are statistically distinguishable, while they should have the same
estimating according to the theory presented thus far. Online Appendix D.4 discusses how this pattern can be
explained by measurement error in self-reported income and demographics entering the eligibility calculation. The
specifications which use Medicaid enrollment as the endogenous variable are free from such bias.
19

===== PAGE 20 =====

Table 2: Medicaid Application: IV Estimates
Has Medicaid Has Private Insurance Has Employer-Sponsored
Insurance
Simulated IV Recentered IV Simulated IV Recentered IV Simulated IV Recentered IV
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Panel A. Medicaid Eligibility Effects
Eligible 0.132 0.072 −0.048 −0.023 0.009 −0.009
(0.028) (0.010) (0.023) (0.007) (0.014) (0.005)
[0.079,0.217] [0.051,0.094] [-0.109,0.010] [-0.040,-0.007] [-0.035,0.052] [-0.021,0.004]
Panel B. Medicaid Enrollment Effects
Has Medicaid −0.361 −0.321 0.068 −0.125
(0.165) (0.092) (0.111) (0.061)
[-0.825,0.069] [-0.561,-0.110] [-0.232,0.429] [-0.264,0.065]
Exposed Sample N Y N Y N Y
States 43 43 43 43 43 43
Individuals 2,397,313 421,042 2,397,313 421,042 2,397,313 421,042
Notes: Panel A of this table reports second-stage coeﬀicients from the two IV regressions described in the text: one using a conventional
simulated instrument and the other using as an instrument a recentered prediction of Medicaid eligibility. Columns 1, 3, and 5 estimate
regressions in the full sample of individuals in 2013–2014, while Columns 2, 4, and 6 restrict to the sample of individuals whose char-
acteristics and state of residence make them exposed to the partial ACA Medicaid expansion in 2014. All regressions control for state
and year fixed effects and an indicator for Republican-governed states interacted with year. Panel B shows estimates from IV regressions
which use an indicator for Medicaid enrollment as the endogenous variable, instead of an indicator for Medicaid eligibility. State-clustered
standard errors are reported in parentheses; 95% confidence intervals, obtained by a wild score bootstrap, are reported in brackets.
20

===== PAGE 21 =====

IV specification. Online Appendix Table A1 shows that adding flexible controls for the individual
characteristics which drive exposure to Medicaid expansions (specifically: full interactions of house-
hold income deciles, parental status, work status, and year) has little effect on the point estimates
and standard errors for both estimators. Here the similar power of recentered IV with and without
flexible controls suggests little added benefit from trying to approximate the adjustment for ψ in
the optimal IV after approximating the recentered best predictor.
Three additional checks are presented in the Online Appendix. First, we check the assumption of
expansion exogeneity with a pre-trend test that replaces the 2013-2014 difference-in-differences IVs
with a comparable 2012-2013 analysis. 33 Table A2 shows that the increased precision of recentered
IV lets us reject the null hypothesis of no pre-trends, highlighting how our approach can improve
power of specification tests as well as effect estimates. While strictly speaking the rejection invali-
dates the identifying assumption underlying our approach (as well as those of earlier analyses), we
proceed with it as the baseline since the magnitude of the placebo coeﬀicient is reassuringly small
(around 0.01–0.02) regardless of the outcome and the instrument. We then check sensitivity to
allowing a state’s decision to expand to depend not only on the governor’s political party but also
on the state’s median household income and the 2012 rate of Medicaid coverage (specifically, by
adding these two state characteristics as controls, interacted with year and state party dummies).
Table A3 shows that estimated effects of eligibility remain very similar across these specifications.
Third, we explore robustness to using the recentered IV without restricting to the exposed sample.
Table A4 shows that this approach only yields power gains when the additional demographic con-
trols (those from Table A1) or an indicator for being in the exposed sample interacted with year
are included as covariates. We discuss the reason for this in Online Appendix D.5 by relating it to
our general eﬀiciency theory of Section 3.2.
Large power gains from recentered IV are confirmed in a Monte Carlo study based on our
baseline estimates. Figure 1 plots simulated power curves for the primary Medicaid enrollment
outcome and the employer-sponsored insurance coverage outcome, while Online Appendix Figure
A2 plots the simulated estimator distributions (Appendix B.2 details the simulation procedure).
In this controlled environment the true causal effect and the shock assignment process are known,
allowing us to verify that the recentered IV estimator is both close to unbiased and substantially
more eﬀicient than the simulated IV estimator. We find, for example, that the minimum detectable
effects of recentered IV (i.e., the smallest null hypotheses which are rejected by a 0.05-size test with
probability 0.8) are roughly three times smaller than those of simulated IV.
5 Conclusion
Many economic treatments are given by formulas which incorporate multiple sources of variation,
only some of which are exogenous. Rather than discarding the other non-random variation, we show
33Specifically, we replace 2013 individuals with 2012 individuals and replace 2014 individuals with 2013 individuals.
We continue to construct the endogenous variable and instrument as an individual’s Medicaid eligibility in 2013 and
2014 for comparability, and also keep all controls unchanged.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====

Figure 1: Medicaid Application: Simulated Power Curves
A. Has Medicaid
5%0.2.4.6.81Rejection Rate-.15-.1-.050.05.1.15CoefficientSimulated IVRecentered IV
B. Has Employer-Sponsored Insurance
5%0.2.4.6.81Rejection Rate-.15-.1-.050.05.1.15CoefficientSimulated IVRecentered IV
Notes: This figure plots the simulated rejection rates of the two IV regressions discussed in the text:
one using a conventional simulated instrument and the other using as an instrument a recentered
prediction of Medicaid eligibility. See Appendix B.2 for a description of the simulation procedure.
Rejection rates are for nominal 5%-level tests of each coeﬀicient based on wild score bootstraps,
clustered by state. The true effect of zero is indicated by the dashed vertical line. The nominal 5%
level of the tests is indicated by the dashed horizontal lines.
22

===== PAGE 23 =====

how it can be used to construct powerful formula instruments. By combining the known treatment
structure with knowledge of the design of exogenous shocks, researchers can construct recentered
instruments which strongly predict the treatment. We show how such recentered best predictors are
formally justified, and how they can be further adjusted to approximate the asymptotically optimal
formula instrument. Empirically, we show substantial power gains from using such instruments to
estimate the crowdout effects of Medicaid enrollment—with standard errors 44% smaller than those
from a conventional simulated instrument approach.
Importantly, while we have focused on the popular setting of simulated instruments, the insights
of this paper may apply to a large class of formula treatments and instruments from a variety of fields.
These include linear and nonlinear shift-share instruments, treatments capturing spillovers across
social networks or geography, instruments based on centralized school assignment mechanisms,
“free-space” instruments capturing access to mass media, and treatments or instruments leveraging
weather shocks (Borusyak and Hull 2021). We expect this class to only increase as researchers find
new and creative ways to exploit exogenous variation in complex treatments.
References
Adão, Rodrigo, Michal Kolesár, and Eduardo Morales. 2019. “Shift-Share Designs: Theory
and Inference. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics 134:1949–2010.
Ai, Chunrong, and Xiaohong Chen. 2003. “Eﬀicient estimation of models with conditional
moment restrictions containing unknown functions. ” Econometrica 71:1795–1843.
Aitken, AC. 1935. “On least squares and linear combination of observations. ” Proceedings of the
Royal Society of Edinburgh 55:42–48.
Anatolyev, Stanislav. 2007. “Optimal instruments in time series: A survey. ” Journal of Economic
Surveys 21:143–173.
Angrist, Joshua D., and JS Pischke. 2008. Mostly harmless econometrics: An empiricist’s
companion. Princeton University Press.
Athey, Susan, and Guido W. Imbens. 2022. “Design-based Analysis in Difference-In-Differences
Settings with Staggered Adoption. ” Journal of Econometrics 226:62–79.
A verett, Susan L, Julie K Smith, and Y ang W ang. 2019. “Medicaid expansion and opioid
deaths. ”Health Economics 28:1491–1496.
Bartik, Timothy J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
W. E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
23

===== PAGE 24 =====

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1999. “Voluntary Export Restraints on
Automobiles: Evaluating a Trade Policy. ” American Economic Review 89:400–430.
Black, Bernard, Alex Hollingworth, Leticia Nunes, and Kosali Simon. 2019. “The Effect of
Health Insurance on Mortality: Power Analysis and What We Can Learn from the Affordable
Care Act Coverage Expansions. ” NBER Working Paper 25568.
Borusyak, Kirill, and Peter Hull. 2021. “Non-Random Exposure to Exogenous Shocks: Theory
and Applications. ” Mimeo.
. 2023. “Non-Random Exposure to Exogenous Shocks. ” Econometrica 91:2155–2185.
Borusyak, Kirill, Peter Hull, and Xavier Jaravel. 2022. “Quasi-Experimental Shift-Share
Research Designs. ”Review of Economic Studies 89:181–213.
. 2025a. “A practical guide to shift-share instruments. ” Journal of Economic Perspectives
39:181–204.
. 2025b. “Design-based identification with formula instruments: A review. ” Econometrics
Journal.
Boustan, Leah, F ernando F erreira, Hernan Winkler, and Eric M. Zolt. 2013. “The effect of
rising income inequality on taxation and public expenditures: Evidence from U.S. Municipalities
and school districts, 1970-2000. ” Review of Economics and Statistics 95:1291–1302.
Brown, David W., Amanda E. Kowalski, and Ithai Z. Lurie. 2018. “Long-Term Impacts
of Childhood Medicaid Expansions on Outcomes in Adulthood. ” NBER Working Paper No.
20835.
Chamberlain, Gary. 1987. “Asymptotic eﬀiciency in estimation with conditional moment restric-
tions. ”Journal of Econometrics 34:305–334.
. 1992. “Eﬀiciency Bounds for Semiparametric Regression. ” Econometrica 60:567–596.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen,
Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2018. “Double/debiased machine learning for treat-
ment and structural parameters. ” Econometrics Journal 21:C1–C68.
Cohodes, Sarah R., Daniel S. Grossman, Samuel A. Kleiner, and Michael F. Loven-
heim. 2016. “The Effect of Child Health Insurance Access on Schooling: Evidence from Public
Insurance Expansions. ” Journal of Human Resources 51:727–759.
Conlon, Christopher, and Jeff Gortmaker. 2020. “Best practices for differentiated products
demand estimation with PyBLP. ” RAND Journal of Economics 51:1108–1161.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====

Courtemanche, Charles, James Marton, Benjamin Ukert, Aaron Y elowitz, and Daniela
Zapata. 2017. “Early impacts of the Affordable Care Act on health insurance coverage in
Medicaid expansion and non-expansion states. ” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
36:178–210.
Coussens, Stephen, and Jann Spiess. 2021. “Improving Inference from Simple Instruments
Through Compliance Estimation. ” Mimeo.
Cullen, Julie Berry, and Jonathan Gruber. 2000. “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd out
Spousal Labor Supply?” Journal of Labor Economics 18:546–572.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Med-
ical Care, and Child Health. ” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:431–466.
. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Eﬀicacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the Medicaid Eligibility
of Pregnant Women. ” Journal of Political Economy 104:1263–1296.
Cutler, David M., and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private
Insurance?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:391–430.
East, Chloe N., and Elira Kuka. 2015. “Reexamining the consumption smoothing benefits of
Unemployment Insurance. ”Journal of Public Economics 132:32–50.
Fiedler, Miroslav. 2003. “Remarks on the Sherman-Morrison-Woodbury formulae” [in en]. Math-
ematica Bohemica 128:253–262. Accessed October 18, 2025.
F rean, Molly, Jonathan Gruber, and Benjamin D. Sommers. 2017. “Premium subsidies,
the mandate, and Medicaid expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act. ” Journal
of Health Economics 53:72–86.
Gao, Mengsi. 2024. “Endogenous interference in randomized experiments. ”arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.02183.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. 2020. “Bartik Instruments :
What, When, Why, and How. ” American Economic Review 110:2586–2624.
Gruber, Jonathan. 2003. “Medicaid. ” In Means-tested transfer programs in the United States,
15–78. University of Chicago Press.
Hackmann, Martin B. 2019. “Incentivizing Better Quality of Care: The Role of Medicaid and
Competition in the Nursing Home Industry. ” American Economic Review 109:1684–1716.
Hansen, Lars Peter. 1985. “A method for calculating bounds on the asymptotic covariance ma-
trices of generalized method of moments estimators. ” Journal of Econometrics 30:203–238.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local
A verage Treatment Effects. ”Econometrica 62:467–475.
25

===== PAGE 26 =====

Kaestner, Robert, Bowen Garrett, Jiajia Chen, Anuj Gangopadhyaya, and Caitlyn
Fleming. 2017. “Effects of ACA Medicaid Expansions on Health Insurance Coverage and
Labor Supply. ”Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 36:608–642.
Kline, Patrick, and Andres Santos. 2012. “A Score Based Approach to Wild Bootstrap Infer-
ence. ”Journal of Econometric Methods 1:23–41.
Leung, Pauline, and Alexandre Mas. 2018. “Employment Effects of the ACA Medicaid Expan-
sions. ”Industrial Relations 57:206–234.
Maclean, Johanna Catherine, and Brendan Saloner. 2019. “The Effect of Public Insurance
Expansions on Substance Use Disorder Treatment: Evidence from the Affordable Care Act. ”
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 38:366–393.
Miller, Sarah, and Laura R Wherry. 2017. “Health and access to care during the first 2 years
of the ACA Medicaid expansions. ” New England Journal of Medicine 376:947–956.
Newey, Whitney K. 1990. “Semiparametric eﬀiciency bounds. ” Journal of applied econometrics
5:99–135.
Newey, Whitney K, and Daniel McF adden. 1994. “Large sample estimation and hypothesis
testing. ”Handbook of econometrics 4:2111–2245.
Newey, Whitney K. 1989. “The Asymptotic Variance of Semiparametric Estimators. ”Unpublished
manuscript.
Robinson, P .M.1988. “Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression. ”Econometrica 56:931–954.
Ross, Nathan. 2011. “Fundamentals of Stein’s method” [in en]. Probability Surveys 8:210–293.
Accessed October 27, 2025.
Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas,
and Matthew Sobek. 2020. IPUMS USA: Version 10.0. Minneapolis, MN.
W ager, Stefan. 2025. “Causal inference: A statistical learning approach. ” URL https://web. stan-
ford. edu/swager/causal_inf_book. pdf.
W ooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. “Econometric analysis of cross section and panel data MIT press. ”
Cambridge, MA.
26

===== PAGE 27 =====

A Theory Appendix
A.1 Predetermined Covariates
Here we generalize our theoretical results to allow for an intercept and other predetermined covari-
ates to be included in estimation. Consider:
Assumption A1. (a) For a symmetric idempotent matrix M which is measurable with respect to
w, we have y = M ˇy, x = M ˇx, and ε = M ˇε; (b) E [ˇεˇε′ | g, w] is almost surely invertible.
This assumption nests the case considered in the main text (by setting M = I); by the Frisch–
Waugh–Lovell theorem it also allows yi, xi, and εi to be residualized in-sample on some vector of lin-
early independent covariates mi(w). The latter corresponds to M = I−m(w) (m(w)′m(w))−1 m(w)′,
with m(w) collecting the mi(w). In this case, E [εε′ | g, w] is necessarily rank-deficient which re-
quires restating several results from the main text. To do so, we let Q† denote the pseudo-inverse
of a generic matrix Q and let Col (Q) denote the column space of Q. We then have:
Proposition A1. Under Assumptions 1 and A1(a), all recentered instruments satisfy the exogeneity
condition (2). Moreover, among instruments in the column space of M , only recentered instruments
satisfy ( 2): for any distribution of (z, g, w) with z ∈ Col(M ) there exists a conditional distribution
of ε | (z, g, w) such that ε ∈ Col(M ) and Assumption 1 holds but ( 2) fails unless z is a deterministic
function of (g, w) satisfying ( 3).
Proposition 1 is a special case corresponding to M = I. When M is instead reduced-rank, the
second statement of Proposition A1 imposes an extra constraint on the adversarial choice of ε:
that it has to be in the column space of M . Because of this, the implication is also weaker: for
instrument validity, one needs M z ∈ R which is weaker than z ∈ R. However, restricting attention
to z ∈ Col(M ) is without loss since ˆβ [z] = ˆβ [M z] for any z.
We next state generalizations of Theorem 1, Proposition 3, and Lemma 2:
Theorem A1. Suppose Assumptions 1 and A1 hold. Then the recentered instrument
z∗ = E

εε′ | g, w
†

E [x | g, w] − E
h
E

εε′ | g, w
† | w
i†
E
h
E

εε′ | g, w
† E [x | g, w] | w
i
.
solves
z∗ ∈ arg min
z∈R
V [z] .
Moreover, for b = E [x | g, w] and A = E [εε′ | g, w],
V [z∗] = E

b′A†b − E
h
b′A† | w
i
E
h
A† | w
i†
E
h
A†b | w
i−1
.
When E [εε′ | g, w] = E [εε′ | w] a.s., these simplify to
z∗ = E

εε′ | w
† (E [x | g, w] − E [x | w]) (A1)
27

===== PAGE 28 =====

and
V [z∗] = E
h
(b − E [b | w])′ E

εε′ | w
† (b − E [b | w])
i−1
.
Proposition A2. Suppose Assumption A1 holds with Var [ˇε | g, w] a.s. invertible, and let ψ =
E [ε | w] and Ω = Var [ε | w] be the conditional mean and variance of the errors. Then z∗ from
equation ( A1) can be written as
z∗ = Ω † (˜z − νρψ ) ,
where ρψ = ψ′Ω† ˜z
ψ′Ω†ψ ψ is the Ω†-weighted projection of ˜z on ψ, and ν = ψ′Ω†ψ
1+ψ′Ω†ψ ∈ [0, 1).
Lemma A1. Suppose Assumption A1 holds. Let ¯λ ≥ 0 be some constant and let E be the class of
random vectors e = ( e1, . . . , eN )′ such that the maximum eigenvalue of E [ee′ | g, w] is bounded by
¯λ uniformly over (g, w). Suppose the only knowledge a researcher has about ε is that ε = M ˇε for
ˇε ∈ E . Then ˜z is approximately minimax, in that:
˜z ∈ arg min
z∈R
max
e∈E
Var [z′M e]
E [z′x]2 .
A.2 Optimal Shift-Share Instruments
Let RS ⊂ R denote the class of recentered shift-share instruments z = S (g − E [g | w]) that are
characterized by an N × K matrix S that is measurable with respect to w.
Proposition A3. Suppose Assumptions 1 and A1 hold, E [εε′ | g, w] = E [εε′ | w] a.s., and Var [g | w]
is a.s. invertible. Let ˜g = g − E [g | w]. Consider the recentered shift-share instrument
zS = E

εε′ | w
† ˜zS for ˜zS = E

x˜g′ | w

Var [˜g | w]−1 ˜g.
The associated ˆβ

zS
has the smallest approximate variance of all recentered shift-share IV esti-
mators
zS ∈ arg min
z∈RS
V [z] .
A.3 Reaching the Semi-Parametric Eﬀiciency Bound
Proposition A4. Suppose the observations of (yi, xi, εi, gi, wi) are iid across i (with distributions
not changing with N ) and that Assumptions 1 and 2 hold with w = ( wi)N
i=1 and g = ( gi)N
i=1.
Suppose further E

ε2
i | gi, wi

= E

ε2
i | wi

as in Theorem 1. Then if ˆβ [z∗] is asymptotically
normal and satisfies Assumptions 1 and 2, and if the sequence (˜z′Ω−1ψ)
2
1+ψ′Ω−1ψ is uniformly integrable,
ˆβ [z∗] asymptotically achieves the Chamberlain ( 1992) semi-parametric eﬀiciency bound.
A.4 Conditions for Asymptotic Normality
A full analysis of the asymptotic normality of recentered IV estimators and asymptotic inference
on them—an open problem as pointed out by Borusyak et al. ( 2025b)—is beyond the scope of the
28

===== PAGE 29 =====

current paper. The special case of shift-share instruments has been worked out by Adão et al. ( 2019,
Proposition 4), assuming a growing number of shocks and suﬀiciently dispersed shock exposure. It
is clear their argument can be extended to the case where the instrument can be well approximated
by a shift-share construction. Building on one of the consistency results of Borusyak and Hull
(2023, Proposition 5), here we provide a complementary set of conditions for asymptotic normality
considering the case where the recentered instrument is defined by an arbitrary nonlinear formula
but depends only on a small set of mutually independent shocks, with non-overlapping sets of shocks
for most observation pairs. We impose:
Assumption A2. (a) zi = fi(gAi; w) ∈ R where gAi ≡ {gk : k ∈ Ai} for Ai ≡ Ai(w) ⊆ {1, . . . , K};
(b) For Di = {j = 1, . . . , N: Ai ∩ Aj ̸= ∅}, |Di| ≤ ¯D uniformly across i and N ;
(c) g ⊥ ⊥ε | w, and the components of g are mutually independent conditional on w;
(d) 1
N
P
i zixi
p
→ Π ̸= 0;
(e) VN ≡ 1
N Var [P
i ziεi | ε, w]
p
→ V > 0;
(f) E

z4
i | w

≤ B4
z , and 1
N
P
i ε4
i = Op(1).
Part (a) of Assumption A2 defines the set of shocks the formula instrument depends on while
part (b) imposes sparsity of the bipartite graph of dependencies between observations and shocks.
The latter implies a growing number of shocks, K → ∞ . Part (c) imposes a stronger version of
Assumption 1 as well as mutual independence of the shocks. Part (d) imposes a standard relevance
condition, which holds if the first-stage relationship between xi and zi is strong and if zi does not
concentrate as N → ∞. Part (e) requires the conditional variance of 1√
N
P ziεi to stabilize. Parts
(b), (d), and (e) naturally hold together when the number of shocks K, observations N , and shock-
observation links L =P
i |Ai| are of the same order (i.e. K/N → κ and L/N → ℓ for 0 < κ, ℓ < ∞)
and when links are dispersed across observations and shocks. Part (f) imposes regularity conditions.
Leveraging Stein’s method for proving asymptotic normality with locally dependent random
variables (specifically as in Ross ( 2011)), we have:
Proposition A5. Suppose Assumption A2 holds. Then the recentered estimator ˆβ [z] is asymptot-
ically normal with √
N

ˆβ [z] − β
 D→ N (0, V /Π2).
We conjecture that most parts of Assumption A2 can be relaxed, in particular allowing max i |Di|
to grow slowly with N . Intuitively, consider the following scenario: each observation is still exposed
to a small number of shocks, i.e., max i |Ai| is bounded, which implies that L is of the same order
as N . We maintain that shock exposure is dispersed, which now means that the largest number
of observations exposed to a given shock is of the same order as the average, O(L/K). However,
suppose L/K grows suﬀiciently slowly, with max i |Di| of the same order. The proof of Proposition
A5 extends with no change if part (b) of Assumption A2 is relaxed to have max i |Di| = o(N 1/4V 3/4
N +
N 1/3V 2/3
N ). Part (d) may also expected to hold as zi, which depends only on a fixed number of
shocks, need not concentrate. Key to the asymptotic normality of ˆβ [z] is then the behavior of
Var [P
i ziεi | ε, w] in part (e). Similar to the analysis in Gao ( 2024), different assumptions on mutual
29

===== PAGE 30 =====

dependence of ziεi among observations exposed to common shocks may lead to asymptotically
normal estimators with different rates. We leave a formal analysis of this scenario to future work.
B Empirical Appendix
B.1 Data Construction
Our application uses a repeated cross-section of annual data from the American Community Survey
(ACS; Ruggles et al. 2020). Our main estimates use representative 1% samples from 2013 and
2014; we use an analogous sample from 2012 to estimate pre-trends. We restrict these samples to
non-disabled adults (aged 21-64) residing in one of the 43 states eligible for Medicaid expansion
under the ACA. To define this sample of states we follow Frean et al. ( 2017) in excluding “early
expansion” states which expanded Medicaid after the ACA but before 2013, as well as Massachusetts
and Vermont which had made all adults with household income less than 138% FPL eligible prior
to the ACA. We also follow Frean et al. ( 2017) in designating 19 of these states as having expanded
under the ACA in 2014, with 24 not expanding. 34
In each year, we classify an individual as insured under Medicaid when they report being covered
by Medicaid or an equivalent government-assistance program, excluding Medicare and Veterans
Affairs insurance. We classify an individual as having private insurance when she is covered by a
plan purchased through an employer or union, or when she purchases this private coverage directly.
We further separate individuals covered by employer-sponsored insurance.
We use the formulas in Frean et al. ( 2017) to define Medicaid eligibility. Income is given by a
household’s total pre-tax personal income or losses ( inctot), adjusted for inflation. Other inputs to
the eligibility calculation include an indicator for whether an individual is a parent (i.e. an adult
with children in the household) and an indicator for whether an individual is in the labor force
(labforce). We note that these may be noisy proxies for the characteristics actual used to assign
Medicaid eligibility.
Our simulated eligibility instrument is constructed by simulating the average Medicaid eligibility
of a representative 10% sample of our analysis data under different state policies. Namely we use
the representative sample to simulate two shares: that of individuals who would be eligible had their
state expanded eligibility in 2014 to everyone under 138% of FPL (24.5%), and that of individuals
who would be eligible if their state kept 2013 policy intact (11.6%). We assign the difference in
these shares to all individuals in 2014 residing in expansion states and zero to all other individuals.
Our recentered instrument is constructed by predicting the actual Medicaid eligibility of each
individual. In 2013 we use actual 2013 eligibility policies, again following Frean et al. ( 2017). In 2014
we predict eligibility by combining information on the 2013 policies and a state’s decision to expand.
An individual is eligible for Medicaid in 2014 if either she was eligible under the 2013 policies of
34Frean et al. ( 2017) study coverage effects over 2014-2015, designating 24 states as having expanded during this
time, 21 states as having not expanded, and 6 states as expanding early. We use their classification system as of 2014,
when only 19 of their 24 states have expanded, and additionally exclude Massachusetts and Vermont.
30

===== PAGE 31 =====

her state (whether or not the state expanded eligibility) or if her household income is below 138%
FPL and her state expanded eligibility under the ACA. To compute the expected instrument µi
we first identify individuals who would have been eligible in 2014 if their state expanded but not
otherwise (the “exposed sample”). Outside of this sample the expected instrument in 2014 is simply
the individual’s actual 2014 eligibility, while inside this sample the expected instrument in 2014 is
the fraction of states which expanded conditional on the governor’s party. The 2013 expected
instrument is actual 2013 eligibility for all individuals. Political party aﬀiliation of state governors
is determined as of December 2013. In all regressions we control for a Republican governor indicator
interacted with year. In robustness checks we control for other time-interacted state characteristics:
a state’s median income over 2009-2013 or its share insured by Medicaid in 2012 (both from the
ACS).
B.2 Power Simulations
We verify large and robust power gains from recentered IV in a Monte Carlo study, in which the
true causal effect and the shock assignment process are known. We draw 1,000 counterfactual
state expansion decisions by choosing random sets of 8 Republican- and 11 Democratic-controlled
states as expansion states and use these shocks to generate simulated instruments and recentered
best predictor instruments. We do not specify a model for e∆
k , and instead take the best predictor
instrument as the endogenous variable. Finally, for the Medicaid take-up and employer-sponsored
insurance crowd-out outcomes we take the second-stage residuals from Columns 2 and 6 of Table 2,
panel A. These outcomes are unrelated to the endogenous variable by design, corresponding to the
true causal effect of zero for all individuals, while keeping the correlation structure from the actual
data. With these generated data, we re-estimate the simulated and recentered IV specifications as
in our baseline implementation in Panel A of Table 2; since the best predictor instrument is the
endogenous variable, recentered IV is here is just OLS in the exposed sample. By design, both
sets of estimates should be centered at the true effects of zero, while we expect the recentered IV
procedure to systematically reject a larger set of alternative hypotheses.
Appendix Figure A2 shows the distribution of simulated and recentered IV estimates for the
two outcomes across Monte Carlo draws. Both estimators are approximately unbiased, with the
distributions in both panels centered around the true effect of zero. However, consistent with
the much shorter confidence intervals in Table 2, the distribution of recentered IV coeﬀicients is
dramatically tighter around this mean. The estimator standard deviation falls from 0.018 to 0.008
as we move from the simulated IV to recentered IV in Panel A, with a larger decline from 0.019
to 0.006 in Panel B. With minimal bias, these correspond to simulated root mean-squared error
reductions of 58.3% and 68.7% with the recentered IV, respectively.
Figure 1 shows that these reductions in estimator variance translate to increased rejection rates
of false null hypotheses for both outcomes, while also suggesting the wild bootstrap 95% confidence
intervals in Table 2 have approximately correct size. Away from the true null hypothesis of zero
the recentered IV power curve is much more steeply sloping, with uniformly higher rejection rates.
31

===== PAGE 32 =====

With the Medicaid take-up outcome, for example, the recentered IV is found to reject coeﬀicients
outside the range of [−0.025, 0.020] with probability of at least 0.8, while the simulated IV only has
such high power outside a nearly three times as long range, of [−0.065, 0.065]. For the employer-
sponsored insurance crowd-out outcome this contrast in minimum detectable effects is even starker,
at [−0.019, 0.016] for the recentered IV versus [−0.065, 0.046] for the simulated IV.
C Proofs
C.1 Proof of Proposition A1
The first statement of the propositions follows by the law of iterated expectations, similarly to
Borusyak and Hull ( 2023) except with a slightly weaker Assumption 1: for a recentered formula
instrument zi,
E
"
1
N
X
i
ziεi
#
= 1
N
X
i
E [ziE [εi | g, w]] = 1
N
X
i
E [ziE [εi | w]] = 1
N
X
i
E [E [zi | w] E [εi | w]] = 0 .
We now prove the second statement of the general Proposition A1, focusing for clarity on the
case of discrete g, w, and z. The continuously-distributed case follows similarly under appropriate
regularity conditions.
To show that, if z ∈ Col(M ), z has to be a formula instrument (i.e. measurable with respect to
g, w), suppose by contradiction there is an observation ι and values (¯g, ¯w) in the support of (g, w)
such that zι takes distinct values ¯z1 and ¯z2 with probabilities π¯zj |¯g, ¯w > 0, j = 1 , 2. Consider the
following data-generating process for ε: ε = M ˇε where ˇεi = 0 for i ̸= ι and
ˇει =
8
>>><
>>>:
(¯z1 − ¯z2)/π¯z1|¯g, ¯w g = ¯g, w = ¯w, zι = ¯z1
−(¯z1 − ¯z2)/π¯z2|¯g, ¯w g = ¯g, w = ¯w, zι = ¯z2
0, otherwise.
Clearly, ε ∈ Col(M ). It is also straightforward to verify that this ε satisfies 0 = E [ε | g, w] =
E [ε | w]. Yet,
E

z′ε

= E

z′M ˇε

= E

z′ ˇε

= (¯z1 · (¯z1 − ¯z2) − ¯z2 · (¯z1 − ¯z2)) · P r (g = ¯g, w = ¯w)
= (¯z1 − ¯z2)2 · P r (g = ¯g, w = ¯w) ̸= 0,
violating ( 2), where the second line holds because M z = z for idempotent M and z ∈ Col(M ).
It remains to be shown that z must be a recentered instrument. Consider a different data-
generating process for ε, in which E [ε | w] = E [z | w] (and again ε ∈ Col(M ) since z ∈ Col(M )).
32

===== PAGE 33 =====

Then, using the fact that z is a formula instrument,
E

z′ε

= E

z′E [ε | g, w]

= E

z′E [ε | w]

= E

E [z | w]′ E [ε | w]

= E

E [z | w]′ E [z | w]

̸= 0,
unless E [z | w] = 0 a.s., violating ( 2) again.
C.2 Proof of Proposition 2
Uniform integrability of 1
N z′x implies E
 1
N z′x

→ Π. Then, denoting the asymptotic distribution
of rN

ˆβ [z] − β

by ˜D and using the continuous mapping theorem,
rN
1
N z′ε
E
 1
N z′x
 = rN

ˆβ [z] − β

·
1
N z′x
Π · Π
E
 1
N z′x
 ⇒ ˜D,
as
1
N z′x
Π
p
→ 1, and Π
E[ 1
N z′x] → 1. Furthermore, uniform integrability of
 
rN 1
N z′ε
2 implies
Var
"
rN
1
N z′ε
E
 1
N z′x

#
= r2
N V [z] → V,
which is equivalent to the Proposition’s claim.
C.3 Proof of Theorem A1
We prove Theorem A1; Theorem 1 is a special case with M (w) = I and E [εε′ | g, w] = E [εε′ | w].
First, we confirm that z∗ ∈ R. By properties of the pseudo-inverse for the symmetric matrix
A = M E [ˇεˇε′ | g, w] M , we have Col (M ) = Col(A) = Col(A†) = Col
 
E

A† | w

a.s.. Moreover,
A†b ∈ Col(M ) a.s. and so E

A†b | w

∈ Col(M ). Thus,
E [z∗ | w] = E
h
A†b | w
i
− E
h
A† | w
i
E
h
A† | w
i†
E
h
A†b | w
i
= 0.
Next, we show that E [z′εε′z∗] = E [z′x] for any z ∈ R. Since both x and ε are in Col (M ) and
M is symmetric idempotent, we can restrict attention to z ∈ Col(M ) without loss of generality: z
and M z produce the same IV estimator. Then:
E

z′εε′z∗
= E

z′Az∗
= E

z′AA†

b − E
h
A† | w
i†
E
h
A†b | w
i
= E

z′b

− E

z′E
h
A† | w
i†
E
h
A†b | w
i
= E

z′x

− 0,
where the third equality follows because z and E

A† | w
† are in Col (M ), and the last equality
33

===== PAGE 34 =====

follows by the law of iterated expectations and because z is mean-zero conditional on any function
of w. Note that z∗ ∈ Col(M ) a.s. and E [z′εε′z∗] = E [z′x] also implies V [z∗] = E [z∗′x]−1.
Following the proof of Theorem 5.3 in Newey and McFadden ( 1994), let
U = z′ε
E [z′x] − z∗′ε
E [z∗′x] .
Then
E

U 2
= Var [z′ε]
E [z′x]2 − 2 E [z′εε′z∗]
E [z′x] E [z∗′x] + E [z∗′εε′z∗]
E [z∗′x]2
= Var [z′ε]
E [z′x]2 − 1
E [z∗′x]
= V [z] − V [z∗] ≥ 0,
showing that z∗ minimizes the approximate estimator variance.
It remains to obtain the expression for V [z∗]. Repeatedly applying the law of iterated expecta-
tions, we have:
V [z∗] = E

z∗′x
−1
= E

b − E
h
A† | w
i†
E
h
A†b | w
i′
A†x
−1
= E

b − E
h
A† | w
i†
E
h
A†b | w
i′
A†b
−1
= E

b′A†b − E
h
b′A† | w
i
E
h
A† | w
i†
A†b
−1
= E

b′A†b − E
h
b′A† | w
i
E
h
A† | w
i†
E
h
A†b | w
i−1
.
In the special case of A = E [εε′ | w] a.s., we have
z∗ = A†

E [x | g, w] −

A†
†
A†E [x | w]

= E

εε′ | w
† (E [x | g, w] − E [x | w])
and
V [z∗] = E

b′A†b − E [b | w]′ A†

A†
†
A†E [b | w]
−1
= E
h
b′A†b − E [b | w]′ A†E [b | w]
i−1
= E
h
(b − E [b | w])′ A† (b − E [b | w])
i−1
34

===== PAGE 35 =====

where the last line follows because E

b′A†E [b | w]

= E

E [b | w]′ A†E [b | w]

by the law of iterated
expectations.
C.4 Proof of Proposition A2
We prove Proposition A2; Proposition 3 is again a special case. By the law of total variance,
E [εε′ | w] = Ω + ψψ′. Since Var [ˇε | g, w] is a.s. invertible, Col (Ω) = Col(M ). Moreover, ψ =
M E [ˇε | w] ∈ Col(M ). By the Sherman-Morrison formula and its extension to the case of possibly
rank-deficient Ω and rank-one update ψψ′ that does not affect the rank of the sum (Fiedler 2003,
Theorem 2.9),
 
Ω + ψψ′† = Ω † − Ω†ψ ψ′Ω†
1 + ψ′Ω†ψ .
Thus:
z∗ = Ω †

˜z − ψ′Ω† ˜z
1 + ψ′Ω†ψ ψ

= Ω † (˜z − ρνψ ) .
C.5 Proof of Lemma 1
We have E [z′x] = E [z′E [x | g, w]] = E [z′ ˜z], where the first equality follows from the law of iterated
expectations and the second equality holds because E [z′E [x | w]] = 0 for any z ∈ R. Thus,
maximizing E[z′x]2
E[z′z]E[x′x] is equivalent to maximizing E[z′ ˜z]2
E[z′z]E[˜z′ ˜z] . By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality,
this ratio attains its maximum of one at z = ˜z.
C.6 Proof of Lemma A1
We prove Lemma A1; Lemma 2 is again a special case. Since E [z′ε] = 0 and z is measurable with
respect to (g, w),
Var

z′ε

= E

z′εε′z

= E

z′E

εε′ | g, w

z

= E

z′M E

ˇεˇε′ | g, w

M z

.
By standard results in linear algebra,
max
e∈E
z′M ′E

ee′ | g, w

M z = ¯λz′M z,
which is achieved when E [ee′ | g, w] = ¯λ M zz′M
z′M z a.s. Thus, the minimax problem simplifies to
min
z∈R
E [z′M z]
E [z′x]2 .
Since x ∈ Col(M ), it is without loss to consider
min
z∈R,
z∈Col(M )
E [z′z]
E [z′x]2 .
35

===== PAGE 36 =====

Minimizing this expression over all z ∈ R is equivalent to maxz∈R
E[z′x]2
E[z′z] and thus to maxz∈R
E[z′x]2
E[z′z]E[x′x] .
By Lemma 1, ˜z is a solution. Since ˜z ∈ Col(M ), it is a solution to the original problem too.
C.7 Proof of Appendix Proposition A3
Let Λ = Var [˜g | w] be the covariance matrix of the shocks and let S∗ = E [εε′ | w]† E [x˜g′ | w] Λ−1.
For brevity, we suppress the dependence of S, S∗, and Λ on w.
As with Theorem 1, we follow the proof of Theorem 5.3 in Newey and McFadden ( 1994). We first
show that E

z′εε′zS
= E [z′x] for any z ∈ RS: repeatedly using the law of iterated expectations,
E

z′εε′zS
= E

˜g′S′εε′S∗˜g

= E

˜g′S′E

εε′ | g, w

S∗˜g

= E
h
˜g′S′E

εε′ | w

E

εε′ | w
† E

x˜g′ | w

Λ−1˜g
i
= tr E
h
E

εε′ | w

E

εε′ | w
† E

x˜g′ | w

Λ−1˜g˜g′S′
i
= tr E
h
E

εε′ | w

E

εε′ | w
† E

x˜g′ | w

S′
i
= tr E
h
E

εε′ | w

E

εε′ | w
† E

xz′ | w
i
= tr E

E

xz′ | w

= tr E

xz′
= E

z′x

,
where the third line imposed the condition E [εε′ | g, w] = E [εε′ | w] from Theorem 1, and the
seventh line follows because x ∈ Col(M ) a.s. implies E [xz′ | w] ⊆ Col(M ) = Col(E [εε′ | w]). The
rest follows identically to Theorem 1, as V [z] − V

zS
= E

U 2
≥ 0 for U = z′ε
E[z′x] − zS ′ε
E[zS ′x] .
C.8 Proof of Proposition A4
By Proposition 2, V [z∗] is the (rescaled) asymptotic variance of the estimator. We have:
V [z∗] = E
h
˜z′ 
Ω + ψψ′−1 ˜z
i−1
= E

˜z′

Ω−1 − Ω−1ψ ψ′Ω−1
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ

˜z
−1
= E
"
˜z′Ω−1 ˜z −
 
˜z′Ω−1ψ
2
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ
#−1
,
where the first line follows from Theorem 1, the second line plugs in the result of Proposition 3,
and the third line rearranges terms.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====

We next show that this expression asymptotically coincides with E

˜z′Ω−1 ˜z
−1. Note that
E
"
˜z′Ω−1 ˜z −
 
˜z′Ω−1ψ
2
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ
#−1
− E

˜z′Ω−1 ˜z
−1
=
E

(˜z′Ω−1ψ)
2
1+ψ′Ω−1ψ

E [˜z′Ω−1 ˜z]

E [˜z′Ω−1 ˜z] − E
h
(˜z′Ω−1ψ)2
1+ψ′Ω−1ψ
i
and, since Var [˜zi | wi] ̸= 0 with positive probability by Assumption 2,
E

˜z′Ω−1 ˜z

=
X
i
E
 ˜z2
i
Var [εi | wi]

= E
 Var [˜zi | wi]
Var [εi | wi]

× N → ∞,
so long as E
h
Var[˜zi|wi]
Var[εi|wi]
i
exists. To establish the result, it remain to show that E

(˜z′Ω−1ψ)
2
1+ψ′Ω−1ψ

does
not diverge to infinity. This is obvious if ψi = 0 a.s. Otherwise, 1√
N ˜z′Ω−1ψ = Op(1) by the central
limit theorem while 1
N
 
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ
 p
→ E

ψ2
i /Var [εi | wi]

> 0. Thus (˜z′Ω−1ψ)
2
1+ψ′Ω−1ψ = Op(1). By
uniform integrability of (˜z′Ω−1ψ)
2
1+ψ′Ω−1ψ , its expectation converges to the finite expectation of the limit
distribution: specifically, to
E
h
Var [˜zi | wi] ψ2
i /Var [εi | wi]2
i
E

ψ2
i /Var [εi | wi]
 .
Finally, we show that E

˜z′Ω−1 ˜z
−1 coincides with the semi-parametric eﬀiciency bound in this
setting. Following the notation of Chamberlain ( 1992), we have a model that satisfies the moment
condition E [ρ(yi, xi, gi, wi, β, h0(wi)) | gi, wi] = 0 where ρ(y, x, g, w, β, τ ) = y − βx − τ and h0( ¯w) =
E [εi | wi = ¯w]. Chamberlain ( 1992) shows the eﬀiciency bound is:
J −1
0 = E
h
E

D′
0Σ−1
0 D0 | wi

− E

D′
0Σ−1
0 H0 | wi

E

H ′
0Σ−1
0 H0 | wi
−1
E

H ′
0Σ−1
0 D0 | wi
i−1
for
D0 = E
 ∂
∂β ρ(yi, xi, gi, wi, β, h0(wi)) | gi, wi

Σ0 = E

ρ(yi, xi, gi, wi, β, h0(wi))ρ(yi, xi, gi, wi, β, h0(wi))′ | gi, wi

H0 = E
 ∂
∂τ ρ(yi, xi, gi, wi, β, h0(wi))′ | gi, wi

.
In our model, D0 = −E [xi | gi, wi] and H0 = −1. Furthermore Σ0 = E
h
(εi − E [εi | wi])2 | gi, wi
i
=
37

===== PAGE 38 =====

Var [εi | wi] since E

ε2
i | gi, wi

= E

ε2
i | wi

. Hence
J0 = E
h
E
h
E [xi | gi, wi]′ Var [εi | wi]−1 E [xi | gi, wi] | wi
ii
− E

E
h
E [xi | gi, wi]′ Var [εi | wi]−1 | wi
i
E
h
Var [εi | wi]−1 | wi
i−1
E
h
Var [εi | wi]−1 E [xi | gi, wi] | wi
i
= E
h
E
h
(E [xi | gi, wi] − E [xi | wi])′ Var [εi | wi]−1 (E [xi | gi, wi] − E [xi | wi]) | wi
ii
= E
 Var [˜zi | wi]
Var [εi | wi]

,
while as shown above the variance of the optimal IV asymptotically coincides with E

˜z′Ω−1 ˜z
−1 =
1
N E
h
Var[˜zi|wi]
Var[εi|wi]
i−1
, where 1
N reflects the notational difference between the asymptotic variance (scaled
by N ) and the approximate variance (not scaled).
C.9 Proof of Proposition A5
Consider Ri = ziεi and R =P
i Ri. Conditional on (ε, w), Ri and Rj are independent if Ai ∩Aj = ∅.
Moreover, E

R4
i | ε, w

= E

z4
i | wi

· ε4
i and similarly E
h
|Ri|3 | ε, w
i
≤ B3
z |εi|3. Thus, by Theorem
3.6 in Ross ( 2011), the Wasserstein distance dW between the distribution of R/√N VN given (ε, w)
and the standard normal distribution is bounded as follows:
dW ≤
¯D2
N 1/2V 3/2
N
B3
z
 
1
N
NX
i=1
|εi|3
!
+
√
28 ¯D3/2
√πN 1/2VN
B2
z
 
1
N
NX
i=1
ε4
i
!1/2
p
→ 0
because 1
N
PN
i=1 |εi|3 ≤

1
N
PN
i=1 ε4
i
3/4
by the Hölder inequality. Thus, R/√N VN
D→ N (0, 1)
conditionally on (ε, w) and therefore unconditionally. Moreover, since VN
p
→ V > 0,
1√
N
X
i
ziεi
D→ N (0, V ).
Using that
√
N ( ˆβ [z]−β) = 1√
N
P
i ziεi/ 1
N
P
i zixi and that the denominator converges in probability
to Π concludes the proof.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====

Online Appendix for Optimal Formula Instruments
Kirill Borusyak and Peter Hull
April 2026
D Additional Results
D.1 Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
This appendix shows that recentered IV estimators can identify a convex average of heterogeneous
treatment effects under natural extensions of the classic assumptions in Imbens and Angrist ( 1994).
Consider a general causal model with potential outcome functions yi(·) and observed outcomes given
by yi = yi(xi). We write y(·) for the vector collecting yi(·). For notational simplicity we suppose
xi is continuously distributed and bounded from below and that yi(·) is differentiable; treatment
effects are then given as βi(x) = ∂
∂x yi(x) for treatment margin x. We further normalize the lower
bound of xi to zero without loss. All of these assumptions are straightforward to relax or modify
under appropriate regularity conditions (see, e.g., Kolesár and Plagborg-Møller ( 2025)).
The potential outcome notation implicitly makes an exclusion restriction: that any effects of g
on yi are only through xi = hi(g, w, u). We further assume a stronger form of shock exogeneity:
Assumption D1. (Independence): g ⊥ ⊥y(·) | w.
This assumption is stronger than the mean-independence Assumption 1 since conditions like As-
sumption 1 are generally not suﬀicient to ensure convex weighting of heterogeneous effects (Borusyak
and Hull 2024). Assumption D1 is nevertheless standard (e.g., it follows Imbens and Angrist ( 1994))
and holds by design when the shocks arise from a randomized controlled trial.
Finally, for a recentered instrument z ∈ R, we consider a stochastic monotonicity assumption:
Assumption D2. (Monotonicity): Cov [1 [xi ≥ x] , zi | y(·), w] ≥ 0 almost-surely for each x and i.
We then have the following result for the IV estimand β [z] =
E[
∑
i ziyi]
E[
∑
i zixi] .
Proposition D1. Under Assumptions D1 and D2,
β [z] = E
"
1
N
X
i
Z ∞
0
βi(x)ωi(x)dx
#
where
ωi(x) = ϕi(x)σ2
i
E
 1
N
P
i
R ∞
0 ϕi(x′)σ2
i dx′ ≥ 0 a.s.
gives a convex weighting scheme, for ϕi(x) = Cov[1[xi≥x],zi|y(·),w]
Var[zi|y(·),w] and σ2
i = Var [zi | w].
39

===== PAGE 40 =====

Proof. Write yi = yi(0)+
R xi
0 βi(x)dx and note that E [ziyi(0)] = E [E [zi | y(0), w] yi(0)] = E [E [zi | w] yi(0)] =
0 by iterated expectations, Assumption D1, and z ∈ R. Thus,
E [ziyi] = E

zi
Z xi
0
βi(x)dx

= E

E
Z xi
0
βi(x)zidx | y(·), w

= E

E
Z ∞
0
βi(x)zi1 [xi ≥ x] dx | y(·), w

= E
Z ∞
0
βi(x)E [zi1 [xi ≥ x] | y(·), w] dx

= E
Z ∞
0
βi(x)ϕi(x)σ2
i dx

where the final line uses E [zi | y(·), w] = 0 and Var [zi | y(·), w] = Var [zi | wi] = σ2
i to show that
E [zi1 [xi ≥ x] | y(·), w] = Cov [zi, 1 [xi ≥ x] | y(·), w] = ϕi(x)σ2
i . Similar steps show
E [zixi] = E
Z ∞
0
ϕi(x)σ2
i dx

,
completing the proof.
The result shows that different recentered IV estimands β [z] generally identify different weighted
averages of treatment effects βi(x). The weights are driven by two factors: the slope coeﬀicient ϕi(x)
in the conditional-on-( y(·), w) observation-specific population regression of 1[xi ≥ x] on zi, and the
conditional-on-w variance of the recentered IV, σ2
i . Assumption D2 makes ωi(x) non-negative.
The monotonicity assumption here is similar to those in Small et al. ( 2017) and Borusyak and
Hull ( 2024) by restricting the conditional relationship between the treatment and the recentered
instrument given potential outcomes and w, rather than defining potential treatment functions as
in Imbens and Angrist ( 1994).35 If such xi(z) are well-defined and weakly increasing in z then
Assumption D2 holds. More generally Assumption D2 can hold when the relationship between
xi = hi(g, w, u) and zi is not causal, such as when u ̸= ∅ and zi = pi(g, w) − E [pi(g, w) | w] for some
function pi(·). See Appendix C of Borusyak and Hull (2024) for an example in the shift-share case.
In the special case where the treatment xi = hi(g, w) is a function of g and w only and zi = xi −
E [hi(g, w) | w], Assumption D2 holds automatically: Cov [xi, 1 [xi ≥ x] | y(·), w] ≥ 0 implies ϕi(x) ≥
0. If furthermore treatment effects are linear, yi = βixi + εi, Proposition D1 shows β [z] identifies a
conditional-variance-weighted average effect, E
 1
N
P
i βiσ2
i

/E
 1
N
P
i σ2
i

, extending a classic result
in Angrist ( 1998). If zi is not only recentered by E [xi | w] but also rescaled by Var [xi | w]−1,
Proposition D1 shows β [z] identifies an unweighted average treatment effect, E
 1
N
P
i βi

.
35Small et al. (2017) consider stochastic monotonicity only for binary treatments while Assumption 3 in Borusyak
and Hull (2024) is stronger than the above condition by restricting the conditional distribution of the treatment
given the instrument. By restricting only the conditional covariance of 1[xi ≥ x] and zi, Assumption D2 better
accommodates formula instruments; see Appendix C of Borusyak and Hull (2024) for a discussion.
40

===== PAGE 41 =====

Proposition D1 also implies that dropping observations with Var [zi | w] = 0 does not change the
estimand, as ϕi(x) = 0 for them. Thus, while our application focused on the sample of “exposed”
individuals for eﬀiciency reasons assuming constant effects, this choice has no consequences for the
interpretation of the estimates even when the effects are heterogeneous.
D.2 Including Fixed Effects
This appendix shows how the framework can be extended to settings where a set of fixed effects, like
the state effects in the Section 4 application, are necessary in estimation. We consider a repeated
cross section of individuals i in years t(i) and states s(i) and a set of state-level shocks g = {gs} to
match our application; the ideas apply more generally. 36
Consider the following causal model (illustrated with a diagram in Appendix Figure A1):
yit = βxit + αs(i) + εit,
where here, in the repeated cross section, t = t(i) and, as before, xit = hit(g, w, u). The αs(i)
capture unobserved time-invariant factors that affect the outcome additively. We assume there are
two groups of such factors: αs = α(γs, δs). The former, γs, is a confounder that affects expansion
decisions gs but is statistically independent of the characteristics of individuals in the states, w =
{cit, s(i)}. The latter, δs, is statistically independent of γs and g but potentially related to w and
u. For example, γs might capture idiosyncratic preferences of the state’s governor while δs captures
long-run economic conditions in the state. 37 The error term εit(i) can be arbitrarily related to w.
Shocks are exogenous in this model, in the sense of Assumption 1, only after removing state fixed
effects: E

εit(i) | g, w

= E

εit(i) | w

, but generally E

αs(i) + εit(i) | g, w

̸= E

αs(i) + εit(i) | w

.
Furthermore, a candidate formula instrument zit = fit(g, w) can be recentered by using permutations
of g as counterfactual shocks. This is because the dependence of gs and γs does not affect the
distribution of g given w and thus permutations of g are equally likely conditional on w. As usual,
recentering is generally needed here since E [εit | w] is unrestricted.
Our theoretical results for optimal formula instruments apply here on the residualized model
˜yit = β ˜xit + ˜εit, (A2)
where ˜vit denotes the residual from a sample projection of generic variable vit on state-of-residence
indicators (see Appendix A.1). Indeed, since s(i) is included in w, such residualization involves
premultiplying the vectors of yit and xit (and therefore of εit) by an annihilator matrix M (w).
Thus Assumption 1 holds for ˜εit, since E [˜ε | g, w] = E [M (w)ε | g, w] = E [M (w)ε | w] = E [˜ε | w].
36Relative to the application, we simplify some details—such as considering simple permutations of expansion shocks
that do not condition on the state governor’s party aﬀiliation.
37Appendix Figure A1 indicates that δs affects the demographics in cit and other policies in u and those variables
affect of yit, but the nature and direction of these relationships is immaterial. Note also that we draw the arrow from
γs to gs and not the other way around only because it is natural to think that the expansion shocks arise later than
the time-invariant factors in γs.
41

===== PAGE 42 =====

Moreover, if E [εε′ | g, w] = E [εε′ | w] as in Theorem 1, we similarly have E [˜ε˜ε′ | g, w] = E [˜ε˜ε′ | w].
Our algorithm for approximating the optimal instrument also applies. The key step is to ap-
proximate E [˜x | g, w] − E [˜x | w] = M (w) (E [x | g, w] − E [x | w]) (with ˜x and x collecting ˜xit and
xit, respectively), which can be accomplished by forming a prediction pit(g, w) of xit, recentering it
by E [pit(g, w) | w] (e.g., by permuting state shocks), and residualizing the recentered prediction by
state indicators. The last step can be automated by including state indicators in estimation, as we
do in the application.
D.3 Plug-In Estimation of the Optimal Instrument
Let E [ε | g, w] = E [ε | w] = ψ, Var [ε | g, w] = Var [ε | w] = Ω , and D ≡ E [εε′ | g, w] = Ω + ψψ′.
Also let E [x | g, w] = p, E [x | w] = E [p | w] = µ, and h = p − µ. Suppose we have estimates
ˆΩ (assumed symmetric and positive semi-definite), ˆψ, and ˆp obtained with cross-fitting; i.e., with
the relevant functions estimated from an independent sample. Set ˆD = ˆΩ + ˆψ ˆψ′, ˆµ = E [ˆp | w]
(computed exactly by integrating over the g | w distribution), and ˆh = ˆp − ˆµ. We will condition
on the sample used for cross-fitting throughout, treating the estimated functions as fixed and thus
ˆD, ˆΩ, ˆψ, ˆµ as measurable with respect to w, and ˆp, ˆh measurable with respect to g, w. The estimates
from multiple folds can be combined using standard DML1 and DML2 arguments (Chernozhukov
et al. 2018; Wager 2025). We also define δ = ˆh − h and ˜ε = ε − ψ, with E [δ | w] = 0 , E [˜ε | g, w] = 0 ,
and E [˜ε˜ε′ | g, w] = E [˜ε˜ε′ | w] = Ω . We write λmin for the smallest eigenvalue and ∥·∥ and ∥·∥op for
the L2-norm and operator norm, respectively. Throughout we omit the phrase “almost surely. ” All
random variables are implicitly indexed by N ; we omit this dependence for notational ease.
We consider the case where the estimator ˆβ [z∗] = z∗′y/z∗′x corresponding to the oracle instru-
ment z∗ = D−1h, is asymptotically normal. We are interested in whether the feasible estimator
ˆβ [ˆz∗] = ˆz∗′y/ˆz∗′x corresponding to the instrument ˆz∗ = ˆD−1ˆh has the same asymptotic distribution.
We impose:
Assumption D3. (a)
r
1
N
P
i

ˆhi − hi
2 p
→ 0,
r
1
N
P
i

ˆψi − ψi
2 p
→ 0, and
 ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1

op
p
→ 0;
(b) There exists c > 0 such that λmin (Ω) ≥ c and λmin

ˆΩ

≥ c with probability approaching 1;
(c) The following are Op(1): ∥Var [ε | w]∥op, ∥Var [h | w]∥op, ∥Var [δ | w]∥op, and 1√
N ∥x∥;
(d) rN = O(
√
N ).
Assumption D3 gives regularity conditions. Part (a) says says that ˆh, ˆψ, and ˆΩ−1 are consistent
in the appropriate sense. Part (b) requires the eigenvalues of Ω and ˆΩ to be bounded away from
zero, yielding stability of their inverses. Part (c) requires that ε and h are suﬀiciently mutually
independent, that δ is either suﬀiciently small or suﬀiciently mutually independent, and a mild reg-
ularity condition on x. Part (d) precludes unusually fast convergence rates of the oracle recentered
IV estimator. Then we have:
Proposition D2. Suppose Assumption D3 holds. Then if ˆβ [z∗] is asymptotically normal and
satisfies Condition 1 then ˆβ [ˆz∗] has the same asymptotic distribution.
42

===== PAGE 43 =====

Cross-fitting and the fact that the instrument is recentered are key to the proof of Proposition
D2. It is also important that, when we set ˆD = ˆΩ + ˆψ ˆψ′, we are effectively using a Neyman-
orthogonal moment for estimation because—by the Sherman–Morrison formula—the estimator is
effectively controlling for ˆψ (up to the regularization; see Proposition 3).
Before proving Proposition D2, we state and prove four useful lemmas.
Lemma D1. Let random variable V be measurable with respect to the information set F and
suppose E

U 2 | F

≤ V . Then U = Op(1) if V = Op(1), and U = op(1) if V = op(1).
Proof. If V = Op(1), fix ϵ > 0 and choose K < ∞ and N0 such that P r (V > K ) < ϵ /2 for all
N ≥ N0. Then for any M > 0,
P r (|U | > M ) ≤ P r (V > K ) + P r (|U | > M, V ≤ K) .
For the second term, condition on F and use conditional Markov:
P r (|U | > M, V ≤ K) = E [1 [V ≤ K] · P (|U | > M | F )]
≤ E
"
1 [V ≤ K] · E

U 2 | F

M 2
#
≤ E

1 [V ≤ K] · V
M 2

≤ K
M 2 .
Choose M large enough that K/M 2 < ϵ /2. Then P r (|U | > M ) < ϵ for suﬀiciently large N , i.e.
U = Op(1).
If V = op(1), fix ϵ > 0 and δ > 0. Choose K > 0 small enough that K/ϵ2 < δ /2. There exists N0
such that P r (V > K ) < ϵ/2 for all N > N 0. Then by an analogous conditional Markov argument,
P r (|U | > ε) ≤ P r (V > K ) + P r (|U | > ε, V ≤ K)
≤ δ/2 + K/ϵ2 < δ
for N large enough, which means U = op(1).
Lemma D2. Let A be an N × N matrix measurable with respect to information set F with ∥A∥op =
Op(1); v be an N × 1 vector measurable with respect to F with 1
N ∥v∥2 = op(1); and u be an N × 1
vector such that E [u | F ] = 0 and ∥Var [u | F ]∥op = Op(1). Then
1√
N
v′Au = op(1).
43

===== PAGE 44 =====

Proof. We have:
E
" 1√
N
v′Au
2
| F
#
= 1
N E

v′Auu′A′v | F

= 1
N v′AE

uu′ | F

A′v
≤
 1
N ∥v∥2

∥A∥2
op
E

uu′ | F

op
=
 1
N ∥v∥2

∥A∥2
op ∥Var [u | F ]∥op
= op(1)Op(1)Op(1) = op(1),
with this bound F-measurable. By Lemma D1, 1√
N v′Au = op(1).
Lemma D3. Let v be an N ×1 vector measurable with respect to information set F with ∥v∥2 = Op(1)
and u be an N × 1 vector such that E [u | F ] = 0 and ∥Var [u | F ]∥op = Op(1). Then v′u = Op(1).
Proof. We have
E
h 
v′u
2 | F
i
= v′E

uu′ | F

v
≤
E

uu′ | F

op ∥v∥2
= ∥Var [u | F ]∥op ∥v∥2
= Op(1)Op(1) = Op(1),
with this bound F-measurable. By Lemma D1, v′u = Op(1).
Lemma D4. Suppose ˆβ [z∗] is asymptotically normal with rate rN . Suppose also rN
N

ˆh − h
′
ˆD−1ε
p
→
0, rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

ε
p
→ 0, and 1
N ˆz∗′x
p
→ Π ̸= 0 . Then rN

ˆβ [ˆz∗] − β

converges to the same
distribution as rN

ˆβ [z∗] − β

.
Proof. We have
rN

ˆβ − β

=
rN
N ˆz∗′ε
1
N ˆz∗′x
with 1
N ˆz∗′x − 1
N z∗′x
p
→ 0. Moreover,
rN
N ˆz∗′ε − rN
N z∗′ε = rN
N

ˆD−1ˆh − D−1h
′
ε
= rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

ε + rN
N

ˆh − h
′
ˆD−1ε
p
→ 0
by the assumptions. Thus, given 1
N z∗′x
p
→ Π ̸= 0,
rN

ˆβ [ˆz∗] − β

=
rN
N z∗′ε + op(1)
1
N z∗′x + op(1) = rN

ˆβ [z∗] − β

+ op(1),
44

===== PAGE 45 =====

implying the proposition’s claim.
Proof of Proposition D2. We verify the conditions for Lemma D4. First consider
rN
N δ′ ˆD−1ε = rN
N δ′ ˆD−1 ˜ε
| {z }
(A)
+ rN
N δ′ ˆD−1 ˆψ
| {z }
(B)
+ rN
N δ′ ˆD−1

ψ − ˆψ

| {z }
(C)
.
Term (A) is op(1) by applying Lemma D2 with F = ( g, w), A = ˆD−1, u = ˜ε, and v = rN√
N δ. Here
∥E [˜ε˜ε′ | g, w]∥op = ∥Ω∥op = Op(1) and
 ˆD−1

op
= λ−1
min

ˆD

= λ−1
min

ˆΩ + ˆψ ˆψ′

≤ λ−1
min

ˆΩ

≤ c−1
with probability approaching 1, which implies
 ˆD−1

op
= Op(1). Moreover,
 r2
N
N

· 1
N ∥δ∥2 =
O(1) · 1
N ∥δ∥2 = op(1).
For term (B) we have:
 rN
N δ′ ˆD−1 ˆψ
 ≤ rN
N
ˆh − h
 ·
 ˆD−1 ˆψ

= rN√
N
s
1
N
X
i

ˆhi − hi
2
·
 ˆD−1 ˆψ
 .
Using the Sherman-Morrison formula for ˆD = ˆΩ + ˆψ ˆψ′,
ˆD−1 ˆψ = ˆΩ−1
 
I −
ˆψ ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1
1 + ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
!
ˆψ =
ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
1 + ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
where
 ˆΩ−1 ˆψ

2
=

ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1/2

ˆΩ−1

ˆΩ−1/2 ˆψ

≤
 ˆΩ−1

op
ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
such that
 ˆD−1 ˆψ
 ≤
 ˆΩ−1

1/2
op
·
q
ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
1 + ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
≤ 1
2
 ˆΩ−1

1/2
op
≤ 1
2 c−1/2
with probability approaching 1 since supx≥0
√x
1+x = 1
2 . Therefore
 ˆD−1 ˆψ
 = Op(1) and
 rN
N δ′ ˆD−1 ˆψ
 =
op(1) · Op(1) = op(1).
For term (C), we apply Lemma D2 with F = w, A = ˆD−1, u = δ, and v = rN√
N

ψ − ˆψ

.
Combining terms (A)–(C), we conclude that rN
N δ′ ˆD−1ε = op(1).
45

===== PAGE 46 =====

Now consider:
rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

ε = rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

˜ε
| {z }
(D)
+ rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

ψ
| {z }
(E)
.
For term (D), by Sherman–Morrison,
rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

˜ε = rN
N h′

ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1

˜ε
| {z }
(D1)
+ rN
N h′ Ω−1ψψ′Ω−1
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ ˜ε
| {z }
(D2)
− rN
N h′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1
1 + ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
˜ε
| {z }
(D3)
.
For (D1) we apply Lemma D2 with F = (g, w), A = I, u = ˜ε, and v = rN√
N

ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1

h where
1√
N
∥v∥ = rN
N


ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1

h

≤ rN√
N
 ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1

op
· 1√
N
∥h∥
= O(1) · op(1) · Op(1) = op(1).
Here 1√
N ∥h∥ = Op(1) because E
h
1
N ∥h∥2 | w
i
= 1
N tr E [hh′ | w] ≤ ∥E [hh′ | w]∥op = ∥Var [h | w]∥op =
Op(1) and applying Lemma D1.
For (D2), let
ζ = Ω−1ψp
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ
so
(D2) = rN
N (h′ζ)(ζ ′ ˜ε).
Note
∥ζ∥2 = ψ′Ω−2ψ
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ
≤
Ω−1
op
ψ′Ω−1ψ
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ
≤
Ω−1
op = Op(1).
Then h′ζ = Op(1) by Lemma D3 with F = w, u = h, and v = ζ. Moreover ζ ′ ˜ε = Op(1) by Lemma
D3, with F = ( g, w), u = ˜ε, and v = ζ. Hence (D2) = rN
N Op(1) = op(1) as rN /N → 0. The same
46

===== PAGE 47 =====

steps show (D3) = op(1), by defining
ˆζ =
ˆΩ−1 ˆψq
1 + ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
,
noting that
ˆζ

2
≤
 ˆΩ−1

op
= Op(1), and following the same steps as with ζ.
For term (E), write
rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

ψ = rN
N h′ ˆD−1 ˆψ
| {z }
(E1)
+ rN
N h′ ˆD−1

ψ − ˆψ

| {z }
(E2)
− rN
N h′D−1ψ
| {z }
(E3)
.
For (E1), recall from the proof for (B) that
 ˆD−1 ˆψ
 = Op(1). Then h′ ˆD−1 ˆψ = Op(1) by Lemma
D3, with F = w, u = h, and v = ˆD−1 ˆψ. Hence (E1) = rN
N Op(1) = op(1) as rN /N → 0. For
(E3), analogous steps show
D−1ψ
 = Op(1) and so rN
N h′D−1ψ = op(1) again by Lemma D3,
with v = D−1ψ. Finally, for (E2), we apply Lemma D2 with F = w, A = ˆD−1, u = h, and
v = rN√
N

ψ − ˆψ

. Thus, we conclude that rN
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

ψ = op(1).
Finally, we turn to the first stage. Using Sherman-Morrison,
1
N ˆz∗′x − 1
N z∗′x = 1
N
ˆh′ ˆD−1x − 1
N h′D−1x
= 1
N

ˆh − h
′
ˆD−1x + 1
N h′

ˆD−1 − D−1

x
= 1
N

ˆh − h
′
ˆD−1x + 1
N h′
 
ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1 + Ω−1ψ · ψ′Ω−1
1 + ψ′Ω−1ψ −
ˆΩ−1 ˆψ · ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1
1 + ˆψ′ ˆΩ−1 ˆψ
!
x
= 1
N δ′ ˆD−1x
| {z }
(F )
+ 1
N h′

ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1

x
| {z }
(G)
+ 1
N h′ζ · ζ ′x
| {z }
(H)
− 1
N h′ ˆζ · ˆζ ′x
| {z }
(I)
.
Here
|(F )| ≤
 1
N ∥δ∥2
1/2 ˆD−1

op
 1
N ∥x∥2
1/2
= op(1)Op(1)Op(1) = op(1),
|(G)| ≤
 1
N ∥h∥2
1/2 ˆΩ−1 − Ω−1

op
 1
N ∥x∥2
1/2
= Op(1)op(1)Op(1) = op(1),
For term (H), we have established earlier that h′ζ = Op(1). Moreover, 1√
N |ζ ′x| ≤ ∥ ζ∥ · 1√
N ∥x∥ =
Op(1) such that 1
N h′ζ · ζ ′x = Op(1/
√
N ) = op(1). The same argument applies to term (I).
With all conditions of Lemma D4 verified, we conclude that ˆβ [ˆz∗] has the same asymptotic
distribution as ˆβ [z∗].
47

===== PAGE 48 =====

D.4 Reconciling Simulated and Recentered IV Estimates
This appendix first discusses how measurement error in Medicaid eligibility calculations can bias
both simulated and recentered IV estimates of eligibility effects. We then show how such bias is
avoided in IV regressions which use Medicaid enrollment as the endogenous variable instead.
For clarity of the theoretical discussion, we simplify the setup. First, we suppose that a single iid
cross-section of 2014 data is available and state fixed effects are not included; we correspondingly
drop the t subscript throughout. Second, we assume that state decisions to expand Medicaid cov-
erage are unconditionally as-good-as-random and mutually independent with the same probability.
We then consider the simple causal model of yi = βx∗
i + εi where yi is a measure of insurance
coverage for individual i and x∗
i ∈ { 0, 1} is i’s true Medicaid eligibility. We suppose changes in x∗
i
come from the exogenous expansion of eligibility policy; formally, we write x∗
i = x∗
i0 + e∗
i gi where
x∗
i0, e∗
i , gi ∈ { 0, 1} with x∗
i0e∗
i = 0 . Here the x∗
i0 indicator switches on for individuals who would
be eligible for Medicaid regardless of the binary expansion shock gi, while e∗
i is on for those who
become eligible when gi = 1 (i.e. exposed individuals). Individuals who are never eligible regard-
less of gi correspond to x∗
i0 = e∗
i = 0 . Rather than observing x∗
i0 and e∗
i directly, we assume the
researcher computes eligibility xi from mismeasured xi0 and ei: i.e., xi = xi0 + eigi where again
xi0, ei ∈ {0, 1} and xi0ei = 0. Such measurement error could reflect error in self-reported household
income or demographics (Brooks 2019). We assume the as-good-as-random expansion shocks only
affect outcomes by changing eligibility, making them exogenous: gi ⊥ ⊥(εi, x∗
i0, e∗
i , xi0, ei).
We first show how simulated and recentered IV estimates of β, which use measured eligibility
as the right-hand side variable, are biased by this measurement error. The simulated IV estimate
uses the expansion shock to instrument measured eligibility in the full sample of individuals. This
IV regression identifies
βSI = Cov [yi, gi]
Cov [xi, gi]
= Cov [β(x∗
i0 + e∗
i gi) + εi, gi]
Cov [xi0 + eigi, gi]
= β E [e∗
i ]
E [ei] , (A3)
where we use the independence of gi in the third line. The recentered IV estimate of β, implemented
as in Panel A of Table 2, regresses the outcome on measured eligibility in the sample of individuals
who are exposed according to the observed ei. This estimator identifies
˜β = Cov [yi, xi | ei = 1]
Var [xi | ei = 1]
= Cov [β(x∗
i0 + e∗
i gi) + εi, gi | ei = 1]
Var [gi | ei = 1]
= βE [e∗
i | ei = 1] , (A4)
48

===== PAGE 49 =====

where we again use the independence of gi in the third line. Since E [e∗
i | ei = 1] ∈ [0, 1) whenever
P r(e∗
i = 0 , ei = 1) > 0 and E [e∗
i | ei = 1] = E [e∗
i ei] /E [ei] < E [e∗
i ] /E [ei] whenever P r(e∗
i = 1 , ei =
0) > 0, these expressions show that the recentered IV estimand is generally attenuated relative to
both the causal parameter of interest and the simulated IV estimand:
 ˜β
 < |β| and
 ˜β
 <
βSI.
The simulated IV estimand can either be larger or smaller than the causal parameter, depending
on the relative shares of true and computed exposure E [e∗
i ] and E [ei].
Such bias, however, does not arise when estimating the effects of Medicaid enrollment using
either of the two instruments. This follows because in such IV regressions both the first stage
regression (of enrollment on the eligibility instrument) and the reduced form (some outcome, such
as private insurance coverage, on the same instrument) have the same proportionate bias given by
equations ( A3) and ( A4), depending on the instrument.
D.5 Eﬀiciency of Full-Sample Recentered IV Estimates
Appendix Table A4 reports recentered IV estimates of Medicaid takeup and crowdout effects in the
full sample of 2014 and 2013 individuals, not restricting to the exposed sample as in our baseline
specification. Panel B, which includes demographic controls, again finds much narrower confidence
intervals relative to the simulated eligibility instrument. However, excluding these controls in Panel
A yields an intriguing pattern: confidence intervals for the recentered IV are much wider than those
of the simulated instrument.
Here we explain how a combination of two factors generates the discrepancy between panels A
and B of the table. First, the regression residuals are strongly correlated with the indicator for
an individual being exposed to the ACA expansion experiment, which is not controlled for in this
regression. Second, exogenous shocks are assigned at the level of states, which include both exposed
and non-exposed individuals. This discussion reveals why the problem does not arise when focusing
on the exposed sample or when appropriate controls are included. We further relate this problem
to the third step of Algorithm 1.
For clarity of the theoretical discussion, we simplify the setup. First, we suppose that a single
2014 cross-section is available and thus state fixed effects are not included; we correspondingly drop
the t subscript throughout. We allow for other controls to be included. Second, we assume states
only change eligibility as prescribed by their expansion decision, i.e., e∆
k = ∅ . Finally, we assume
that state decisions to expand are independent with a known propensity E [gk | w] (e.g., as a function
of the state governor’s party). Thus, the recentered expansion indicator ˜gk = gk − E [gk | w] can
be computed without permutations. 38 We compare the recentered simulated instrument zSI
i to the
recentered best predictor instrument ˜zi, ignoring controls that span E [gk | w] (e.g., the state party
indicator).
Under these additional assumptions, using the recentered simulated instrument is equivalent to
using the recentered expansion indicator: zSI
i = ˜gs(i). The recentered best predictor instrument
38Formally, we assume that w does not include the permutation class of g. Under this assumption, ˜gk is independent
across states conditionally on w, simplifying the analysis.
49

===== PAGE 50 =====

only differs by setting zSI
i to zero for the non-exposed sample: ˜zi = zi − E [zi | w] = fi˜gs(i), where
fi is an indicator for individual i being in the exposed group. With xi = zi, the first stage can be
written xi = µi + fi˜gs(i), where the expected instrument µi equals 0 for individuals who are not
eligible regardless of gs(i), 1 for those always eligible, and E

gs(i) | w

otherwise.
We now consider the approximate variances of the two estimators, Var
 1
N
P
i zSI
i ε⊥
i

/E
 1
N
P
i zSI
i x⊥
i
2
and Var
 1
N
P
i ˜ziε⊥
i

/E
 1
N
P
i ˜zix⊥
i
2, where ⊥ denotes the in-sample projection residual on the con-
trol variables (including a constant). We focus our attention on the numerators of these expressions
because the first-stage covariances in the denominator are asymptotically equivalent (and equal in
finite samples without controls). 39 For simplicity of exposition we also consider an individual’s state
of residence s(i) as fixed. Letting Nk =P
i 1 [s(i) = k] denote the (fixed) number of individuals in
each state k, it can then be shown that
Var
 1
N
P
i ˜ziε⊥
i

Var
 1
N
P
i zSI
i ε⊥
i
 =
P
k

Nk
N
2
Var [˜gk] E
h
e2
RI,k
i
P
k

Nk
N
2
Var [˜gk] E
h
e2
SI,k
i , (A5)
where eRI,k = 1
Nk
P
i : s(i)=k ε⊥
i fi is the sum of residuals of exposed individuals in state k (normalized
by Nk), while eSI,k = 1
Nk
P
i : s(i)=k ε⊥
i averages over all observations in the state. 40
Equation ( A5) shows that the recentered IV delivers power gains relative to the simulated
instrument approach whenever the normalized sum of residuals is closer to zero for a typical state,
in the mean-squared sense, when restricting to exposed individuals. The restricted sum has fewer
summands, working in favor of the recentered IV. If the expansion shocks were assigned at the
individual level, without state clustering, this would guarantee that the recentered IV is more
eﬀicient (since eRI,k = eSI,k for exposed individuals in that case).
However, this simplified example shows that the recentered IV is likely to deliver a power loss
when the shocks gk are clustered and ε⊥
i is strongly correlated with the indicator of exposed sample
fi (i.e., exposed individuals have systematically different residuals, and fi is not controlled for). To
see this simply, suppose E

ε⊥
i | fi = 1, w

= α ̸= 0 for all i. In this scenario eRI,k is not mean-zero,
even on average across states, which potentially yields a high mean-squared residual:
E [eRI,k ] = E [E [eRI,k | w]] = E
2
4 1
Nk
X
i : s(i)=k
E
h
ε⊥
i fi | w
i
3
5
= E
2
4 1
Nk
X
i : s(i)=k
E
h
ε⊥
i | fi = 1, w
i
fi
3
5 = α · E
"P
i : s(i)=k fi
Nk
#
̸= 0.
39Namely, since fi is binary, E
[ 1
N
∑
i zSI
i xi
]
= E
[ 1
N
∑
i ˜gs(i)
(
µi + fi˜gs(i)
)]
= E
[ 1
N
∑
i fi˜g2
s(i)
]
=
E
[ 1
N
∑
i fi˜gs(i)
(
µi + fi˜gs(i)
)]
= E
[ 1
N
∑
i ˜zixi
]
. With controls this equality holds asymptotically, since the differ-
ence between xi and x⊥
i is uncorrelated with zSI
i − ˜zi = (1 − fi) ˜gs(i).
40Namely, Var
[ 1
N
∑
i ˜ziε⊥
i
]
= ∑
k
(
Nk
N
) 2
E
[(
1
Nk
∑
i : s(i)=k ˜ziε⊥
i
) 2]
= ∑
k
(
Nk
N
) 2
E
[
˜g2
k ·
(
1
Nk
∑
i : s(i)=k fiε⊥
i
) 2]
=
∑
k
(
Nk
N
) 2
Var [˜gk] E
[
e2
RI,k
]
, since E
[ 1
N
∑
i ˜ziε⊥
i
]
= 0, and similarly for Var
[ 1
N
∑
i zSI
i ε⊥
i
]
.
50

===== PAGE 51 =====

The simulated instrument, which does not condition on fi = 1 , does not suffer from this problem
since ε⊥
i is mean-zero in the sample. Another interpretation of this problem is that in this case the
sums of residuals over the exposed and non-exposed individuals of a given state will tend to have
opposite signs, increasing eﬀiciency of the simulated instrument that uses both subsamples.
The predictions of this discussion are borne out in the data. In Panel C of Appendix Table
A4 we verify that the confidence interval of recentered IV becomes dramatically narrowed with a
single control of fi (interacted with the 2014 indicator appropriately for the difference-in-differences
setting).41 Moreover, demographic controls in Panel B of Appendix Table A4 capture most of the
variation in fi, delivering similar results. Our recentered IV specifications in the main text, by
restricting the sample to the exposed individuals, effectively control for year interacted with fi.
We note that here controlling for the exposed sample indicator is closely related to our third step
in constructing the optimal recentered IV, discussed in Section 3.3: this control happens to play the
role of the predetermined predictors of the residual, ψ. Our application therefore highlights that in
general there is no guarantee of an eﬀiciency gain from improving the first stage with a recentered
IV (i.e., approximating the recentered best predictor) if adjustment for ψ is not feasible.
References
Angrist, Joshua. 1998. “Estimating the labor market impact of voluntary military service using
social security data on military applicants. ” Econometrica 66:249–288.
Borusyak, Kirill, and Peter Hull. 2024. “Negative weights are no concern in design-based speci-
fications. ” InAEA Papers and Proceedings, 114:597–600. American Economic Association 2014
Broadway, Suite 305, Nashville, TN 37203.
Brooks, T ricia. 2019. “What Some Researchers Get Wrong About Medicaid’s Income Eligibility
Requirements. ”Health Affairs Blog.
Chernozhukov, Victor, Denis Chetverikov, Mert Demirer, Esther Duflo, Christian Hansen,
Whitney Newey, and James Robins. 2018. “Double/debiased machine learning for treat-
ment and structural parameters. ” Econometrics Journal 21:C1–C68.
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of Local
A verage Treatment Effects. ”Econometrica 62:467–475.
Kolesár, Michal, and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller. 2025. “Dynamic causal effects in a nonlinear
world: the good, the bad, and the ugly. ” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 43:737–754.
Small, Dylan S, Zhiqiang T an, Roland R Ramsahai, Scott A Lorch, and M Alan Brookhart.
2017. “Instrumental variable estimation with a stochastic monotonicity assumption. ”
41The eﬀiciency of IV specifications that only control for the expected eligibility prediction in columns 2, 4, and 6
of Panel A is lower because this control does not span fi.
51

===== PAGE 52 =====

W ager, Stefan. 2025. “Causal inference: A statistical learning approach. ” URL https://web. stan-
ford. edu/swager/causal_inf_book. pdf.
52

===== PAGE 53 =====

Online Appendix Figures and Tables
Figure A1: Causal Diagram with Fixed Effects
yit
αs
δs
cit, s(i), u
γs
gs
xit
Notes: This figure illustrates the causal model in Appendix D.2.
53

===== PAGE 54 =====

Figure A2: Medicaid Application: Simulated Estimator Distributions
A. Has Medicaid
01020304050Density-.1-.050.05.1Coefficient EstimateSimulated IVRecentered IV
B. Has Employer-Sponsored Insurance
020406080Density-.1-.050.05.1Coefficient EstimateSimulated IVRecentered IV
Notes: This figure plots the simulated distributions of the two IV regression discussed in the text:
one using a conventional simulated instrument and the other using as an instrument a recentered
prediction of Medicaid eligibility. See Appendix B.2 for a description of the simulation procedure.
The true effect of zero in both panels is indicated by the dashed vertical line.
54

===== PAGE 55 =====

Table A1: Medicaid Application: Second Stage-Estimates with Additional Controls
Has Medicaid Has Private Insurance Has Employer-Sponsored
Insurance
Simulated IV Recentered IV Simulated IV Recentered IV Simulated IV Recentered IV
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Panel A. Medicaid Eligibility Effects
Eligible 0.135 0.073 −0.050 −0.024 0.003 −0.008
(0.029) (0.010) (0.022) (0.007) (0.013) (0.005)
[0.082,0.224] [0.050,0.095] [-0.112,0.001] [-0.042,-0.008] [-0.039,0.037] [-0.019,0.005]
Panel B. Medicaid Enrollment Effects
Has Medicaid −0.372 −0.334 0.023 −0.108
(0.146) (0.091) (0.097) (0.060)
[-0.767,0.008] [-0.566,-0.121] [-0.238,0.322] [-0.235,0.081]
Exposed Sample N Y N Y N Y
States 43 43 43 43 43 43
Individuals 2,397,313 421,042 2,397,313 421,042 2,397,313 421,042
Notes: Panel A of this table reports second-stage coeﬀicients from the two IV regressions described in the text: one using a conventional
simulated instrument and the other using as an instrument a recentered prediction of Medicaid eligibility. Columns 1, 3, and 5 estimate
regressions in the full sample of individuals in 2013–2014, while Columns 2, 4, and 6 restrict to the sample of individuals whose charac-
teristics and state of residence make them exposed to the partial ACA Medicaid expansion in 2014. All regressions control for state and
year fixed effects, an indicator for Republican-governed states interacted with year, and full interactions of deciles of household income,
parental status, work status, and year. Panel B shows estimates from IV regressions which use an indicator for Medicaid enrollment as
the endogenous variable, instead of an indicator for Medicaid eligibility. State-clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses; 95%
confidence intervals, obtained by a wild score bootstrap, are reported in brackets.
55

===== PAGE 56 =====

Table A2: Medicaid Application: Pre-Trend Estimates
Has Medicaid Has Private Insurance Has Employer-Sponsored
Insurance
Simulated IV Recentered IV Simulated IV Recentered IV Simulated IV Recentered IV
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Panel A. Baseline Specification
Eligibile 0.022 0.020 −0.015 −0.011 −0.011 −0.007
(0.009) (0.004) (0.017) (0.004) (0.017) (0.005)
[-0.005,0.043] [0.008,0.028] [-0.071,0.022] [-0.020,-0.003] [-0.061,0.026] [-0.020,0.004]
Panel B. With Additional Controls
Eligibile 0.023 0.020 −0.019 −0.014 −0.016 −0.011
(0.010) (0.004) (0.014) (0.004) (0.016) (0.005)
[-0.012,0.040] [0.009,0.027] [-0.056,0.020] [-0.022,-0.006] [-0.051,0.031] [-0.023,0.001]
Exposed Sample N Y N Y N Y
States 43 43 43 43 43 43
Individuals 2,400,142 425,112 2,400,142 425,112 2,400,142 425,112
Notes: This table reports pre-trend estimates for the two IV regressions described in the text: one using a conventional simulated
instrument and the other using as an instrument a recentered prediction of Medicaid eligibility. Pre-trend estimates come from the IV
specifications described in the text replacing 2013 individuals with 2012 individuals and replacing 2014 individuals with 2013 individuals.
Columns 1, 3, and 5 estimate regressions in the full sample of individuals, while Columns 2, 4, and 6 restrict to the sample of individuals
whose characteristics and state of residence make them exposed to the partial ACA Medicaid expansion in 2014. All regressions control for
state and year fixed effects and an indicator for Republican-governed states interacted with year. The regressions in Panel B additionally
control for deciles of household income, interacted with indicators for parental and work status and year. Conventional state-clustered
standard errors are reported in parentheses; 95% confidence intervals, obtained by a wild score bootstrap, are reported in brackets.
56

===== PAGE 57 =====

Table A3: Medicaid Application: Alternative Designs
Has Medicaid Has Private
Insurance
Has Employer-
Sponsored
Insurance
(1) (2) (3)
Panel A. Republican Governor and 2012 Median Income
Eligible 0.078 −0.016 −0.003
(0.011) (0.008) (0.006)
[0.053,0.099] [-0.041,0.001] [-0.018,0.010]
Has Medicaid −0.210 −0.043
(0.106) (0.073)
[-0.526,0.016] [-0.217,0.169]
Panel B. Republican Governor, 2012 Median Income, 2012 Medicaid Coverage
Eligible 0.076 −0.023 −0.009
(0.012) (0.007) (0.005)
[0.053,0.103] [-0.040,-0.007] [-0.021,0.003]
Has Medicaid −0.302 −0.123
(0.095) (0.059)
[-0.543,-0.094] [-0.254,0.056]
Exposed Sample Y Y Y
States 43 43 43
Individuals 421,042 421,042 421,042
Notes: This table adds additional controls to the recentered IV regressions in Table 2; each row
corresponds to a different IV specification, paralleling the two panels in Table 2. The regressions
in both panels of this table add interactions of the 2009-2013 state median income, year, and the
Republican governor indicator. The regressions in Panel B additionally control for the interactions
of 2012 state Medicaid coverage rates with those three variables. State-clustered standard errors are
reported in parentheses; 95% confidence intervals, obtained by a wild score bootstrap, are reported
in brackets.
57

===== PAGE 58 =====

Table A4: Medicaid Application: Recentered IV Including Non-Exposed Individuals
Has Medicaid Has Private Insurance Has Employer-Sponsored
Insurance
Recentered Controlled Recentered Controlled Recentered Controlled
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Panel A. Baseline Controls
Eligible 0.032 0.071 0.193 0.098 0.208 0.110
(0.085) (0.044) (0.290) (0.168) (0.301) (0.173)
[-0.425,0.149] [-0.093,0.139] [-0.209,1.795] [-0.170,0.693] [-0.208,1.872] [-0.172,0.729]
Panel B. With Demographics × Post
Eligible 0.116 0.114 −0.029 −0.029 −0.018 −0.018
(0.012) (0.012) (0.013) (0.013) (0.012) (0.014)
[0.092,0.150] [0.083,0.146] [-0.052,0.002] [-0.052,0.012] [-0.040,0.013] [-0.040,0.026]
Panel C. With Exposed Sample × Post
Eligible 0.094 0.093 −0.012 −0.011 −0.005 −0.004
(0.011) (0.023) (0.015) (0.043) (0.017) (0.045)
[0.063,0.118] [-0.000,0.128] [-0.038,0.034] [-0.072,0.176] [-0.033,0.047] [-0.067,0.192]
Exposed Sample N N N N N N
States 43 43 43 43 43 43
Individuals 2,397,313 2,397,313 2,397,313 2,397,313 2,397,313 2,397,313
Notes: Panel A of this table reports second-stage coeﬀicients from versions of the recentered IV regressions in Table 2, estimated in the
full sample of individuals in 2013–14. Columns 1, 3, and 5 use as an instrument a recentered prediction of Medicaid eligibility while
Columns 2, 4, and 6 do not recenter but control for the expected prediction. All regressions control for state and year fixed effects and
an indicator for Republican-governed states interacted with year. The regressions in Panel B additionally control for deciles of household
income, interacted with indicators for parental and work status and year. The regressions in Panel C instead add the interaction of
year and an indicator for an individual having characteristics that make them exposed to the partial ACA Medicaid expansion in 2014.
State-clustered standard errors are reported in parentheses; 95% confidence intervals, obtained by a wild score bootstrap, are reported in
brackets.
58